Enterprise foundations blueprint  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Enterprise foundations blueprint
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-05-15 UTC
This document describes the best practices that let you deploy a foundational
set of resources in Google Cloud. A cloud foundation is the baseline of
resources, configurations, and capabilities that enable companies to adopt
Google Cloud for their business needs. A well-designed foundation enables
consistent governance, security controls, scale, visibility, and access to
shared services across all workloads in your Google Cloud environment. After you
deploy the controls and governance that are described in this document, you can
deploy workloads to Google Cloud.
The
enterprise foundations blueprint
(formerly known as the
security
foundations blueprint
) is intended for architects, security practitioners, and
platform engineering teams who are responsible for designing an enterprise-ready
environment on Google Cloud. This blueprint consists of the following:
A
terraform-example-foundation GitHub
repository
that contains the deployable Terraform assets.
A guide that describes the architecture, design, and controls that you
implement with the blueprint (this document).
You can use this guide in one of two ways:
To create a complete foundation based on Google's best
practices. You can deploy all the recommendations from this guide as a
starting point, and then customize the environment to address your
business' specific requirements.
To review an existing environment on Google Cloud. You can
compare specific components of your design against Google-recommended best
practices.
Supported use cases
The enterprise foundation blueprint provides a baseline layer of resources and
configurations that help enable all types of workloads on Google Cloud.
Whether you're migrating existing compute workloads to Google Cloud,
building containerized web applications, or creating big data and machine
learning workloads, the enterprise foundation blueprint helps you build your
environment to support enterprise workloads at scale.
After you deploy the enterprise foundation blueprint, you can deploy workloads
directly or deploy additional blueprints to support complex workloads that
require additional capabilities.
A defense-in-depth security model
Google Cloud services benefit from the underlying
Google infrastructure security design
.
It is your responsibility to design security into the systems that you build on
top of Google Cloud. The enterprise foundation blueprint helps you to
implement a defense-in-depth security model for your Google Cloud services
and workloads.
The following diagram shows a defense-in-depth security model for your
Google Cloud organization that combines architecture controls, policy
controls, and detective controls.
The diagram describes the following controls:
Policy controls
are programmatic constraints that enforce
acceptable resource configurations and prevent risky configurations. The
blueprint uses a combination of policy controls including
infrastructure-as-code (IaC) validation in your pipeline and organization
policy constraints.
Architecture controls
are the configuration of Google Cloud
resources like networks and resource hierarchy. The blueprint architecture
is based on security best practices.
Detective controls
let you detect anomalous or malicious behavior
within the organization. The blueprint uses platform features such as
Security Command Center, integrates with your existing detective controls and
workflows such as a security operations center (SOC), and provides
capabilities to enforce custom detective controls.
Key decisions
This section summarizes the high-level architectural decisions of the
blueprint.
The diagram describes how Google Cloud services contribute to key
architectural decisions:
Cloud Build:
Infrastructure resources are managed using a
GitOps model. Declarative IaC is written in
Terraform and managed in a version control system for review and approval,
and resources are deployed using Cloud Build as the continuous
integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD) automation tool. The pipeline
also enforces policy-as-code checks to validate that resources meet
expected configurations before deployment.
Cloud Identity:
Users and group membership are synchronized from
your existing identity provider. Controls for user account lifecycle
management and single sign-on (SSO) rely on the existing controls and
processes of your identity provider.
Identity and Access Management (IAM):
Allow policies (formerly known as
IAM policies) allow access to resources and are applied to
groups based on job function. Users are added to the appropriate groups to
receive view-only access to foundation resources. All changes to foundation
resources are deployed through the CI/CD pipeline which uses privileged
service account identities.
Resource Manager:
All resources are managed under a single
organization, with a resource hierarchy of folders that organizes projects
by environments. Projects are labeled with metadata for governance
including cost attribution.
Networking
: Network topologies use Shared VPC to provide
network resources for workloads across multiple
regions
and zones, separated by environment, and managed centrally. All network
paths between on-premises hosts, Google Cloud resources in the VPC
networks, and Google Cloud services are private. No outbound traffic
to or inbound traffic from the public internet is permitted by default.
Cloud Logging
: Aggregated log sinks are configured to collect logs
relevant for security and auditing into a centralized project for long-term
retention, analysis, and export to external systems.
Organization Policy Service:
Organization policy constraints are
configured to prevent various high-risk configurations.
Secret Manager:
Centralized projects are created for a team
responsible for managing and auditing the use of sensitive application
secrets to help meet compliance requirements.
Cloud Key Management Service (Cloud KMS):
Centralized projects are created for a
team responsible for managing and auditing encryption keys to help meet
compliance requirements.
Security Command Center:
Threat detection and monitoring capabilities are
provided using a combination of built-in security controls from
Security Command Center and custom solutions that let you detect and respond to
security events.
For alternatives to these key decisions, see
alternatives
.
What's next
Read about
authentication and
authorization
(next document in this series).
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-05-15 UTC.