Disaster recovery planning guide  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Disaster recovery planning guide
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-07-05 UTC
This document is the first part of a series that discusses
disaster recovery (DR)
in Google Cloud. This part provides an overview of the DR
planning process: what you need to know in order to design and implement a DR
plan. Subsequent parts discuss specific DR use cases with example
implementations on Google Cloud.
The series consists of the following parts:
Disaster recovery planning guide (this document)
Disaster recovery building blocks
Disaster recovery scenarios for data
Disaster recovery scenarios for applications
Architecting disaster recovery for locality-restricted workloads
Disaster recovery use cases: locality-restricted data analytic applications
Architecting disaster recovery for cloud infrastructure outages
Service-interrupting events can happen at any time. Your network could have an
outage, your latest application push might introduce a critical bug, or you
might have to contend with a natural disaster. When things go awry, it's
important to have a robust, targeted, and well-tested DR plan.
With a well-designed, well-tested DR plan in place, you can make sure that if
catastrophe hits, the impact on your business's bottom line will be minimal. No
matter what your DR needs look like, Google Cloud has a robust, flexible, and
cost-effective selection of products and features that you can use to build or
augment the solution that is right for you.
Basics of DR planning
DR is a subset of
business continuity planning
.
DR planning begins with a business impact analysis that defines two key
metrics:
A
recovery time objective
(RTO)
,
which is the maximum acceptable length of time that your application can be
offline. This value is usually defined as part of a larger
service level agreement (SLA)
.
A
recovery point objective
(RPO)
,
which is the maximum acceptable length of time during which data might be
lost from your application due to a major incident. This metric varies
based on the ways that the data is used. For example, user data that's
frequently modified could have an RPO of just a few minutes. In contrast,
less critical, infrequently modified data could have an RPO of several
hours. (This metric describes only the length of time; it doesn't address
the amount or quality of the data that's lost.)
Typically, the smaller your RTO and RPO values are (that is, the faster your
application must recover from an interruption), the more your application will
cost to run. The following graph shows the ratio of cost to RTO/RPO.
Because smaller RTO and RPO values often mean greater complexity, the associated
administrative overhead follows a similar curve. A high-availability application
might require you to manage distribution between two physically separated data
centers, manage replication, and more.
RTO and RPO values typically roll up into another metric: the
service level objective
(SLO)
,
which is a key measurable element of an SLA. SLAs and SLOs are often
conflated. An SLA is the entire agreement that specifies what service is to be
provided, how it is supported, times, locations, costs, performance, penalties,
and responsibilities of the parties involved. SLOs are specific, measurable
characteristics of the SLA, such as availability, throughput, frequency,
response time, or quality. An SLA can contain many SLOs. RTOs and RPOs are
measurable and should be considered SLOs.
You can read more about
SLOs and SLAs
in the Google Site Reliability Engineering book.
You might also be planning an architecture for
high availability (HA)
.
HA doesn't entirely overlap with DR, but it's often necessary to take HA into
account when you're thinking about RTO and RPO values. HA helps to ensure an
agreed level of operational performance, usually
uptime
,
for a higher than normal period. When you run production workloads on
Google Cloud, you might use a globally distributed system so that if
something goes wrong in one
region
,
the application continues to provide service even if it's less widely available.
In essence, that application invokes its DR plan.
Why Google Cloud?
Google Cloud can greatly reduce the costs that are associated with both
RTO and RPO when compared to fulfilling RTO and RPO requirements on premises.
For example, DR planning requires you to account for a number of
requirements, including the following:
Capacity:
securing enough resources to scale as needed.
Security:
providing physical security to protect assets.
Network infrastructure:
including software components such as
firewalls and load balancers.
Support:
making available skilled technicians to perform maintenance
and to address issues.
Bandwidth:
planning suitable bandwidth for peak load.
Facilities:
ensuring physical infrastructure, including equipment and
power.
By providing a highly managed solution on a world-class production platform,
Google Cloud helps you bypass most or all of these complicating factors,
removing many business costs in the process. In addition, Google Cloud's
focus on administrative simplicity means that the costs of managing a complex
application are reduced as well.
Google Cloud offers several features that are relevant to DR planning,
including the following:
A global network
. Google has one of the largest and most advanced
computer networks in the world. The Google backbone network uses advanced
software-defined networking and edge-caching services to deliver fast,
consistent, and scalable performance.
Redundancy
. Multiple points of presence (PoPs) across the globe mean
strong redundancy. Your data is mirrored automatically across storage
devices in multiple locations.
Scalability
. Google Cloud is designed to scale like other Google
products (for example, search and Gmail), even when you experience a huge
traffic spike. Managed services such as Cloud Run,
Compute Engine, and Firestore give
you automatic scaling that enables your application to grow
and shrink as needed.
Security
. The
Google security model
is built on decades of experience with helping to keep customers safe
on Google applications like Gmail and Google Workspace. In addition, the
site reliability engineering teams at Google help ensure high availability
and help prevent abuse of platform resources.
Compliance
. Google undergoes regular independent third-party audits
to verify that Google Cloud is in alignment with security, privacy,
and compliance regulations and best practices. Google Cloud
complies
with certifications such as ISO 27001, SOC 2/3, and PCI DSS 3.0.
DR patterns
DR patterns are considered to be cold, warm, or hot. These patterns indicate how
readily the system can recover when something goes wrong. An analogy might be
what you would do if you were driving and punctured a car tire.
How you deal with a flat tire depends on how prepared you are:
Cold: You have no spare tire, so you must call someone to come to you
with a new tire and replace it. Your trip stops until help arrives to make
the repair.
Warm: You have a spare tire and a replacement kit, so you can get back on
the road using what you have in your car. However, you must stop your
journey to repair the problem.
Hot: You have run-flat tires. You might need to slow down a little, but
there is no immediate impact on your journey. Your tires run well enough
that you can continue (although you must eventually address the issue).
Creating a detailed DR plan
This section provides recommendations for how to create your DR plan.
Design according to your recovery goals
When you design your DR plan, you need to combine your application and data
recovery techniques and look at the bigger picture. The typical way to do this
is to look at your RTO and RPO values and which DR pattern you can adopt to meet
those values. For example, in the case of historical compliance-oriented data,
you probably don't need speedy access to the data, so a large RTO value and cold
DR pattern is appropriate. However, if your online service experiences an
interruption, you'll want to be able to recover both the data and the
user-facing part of the application as quickly as possible. In that case, a
hot pattern would be more appropriate. Your email notification system, which
typically isn't business critical, is probably a candidate for a warm pattern.
For guidance on using Google Cloud to address common DR scenarios, review
the application recovery scenarios. These scenarios provide targeted DR
strategies for a variety of use cases and offer example implementations on
Google Cloud for each.
Design for end-to-end recovery
It isn't enough just to have a plan for backing up or archiving your data. Make
sure your DR plan addresses the full recovery process, from backup to restore to
cleanup. We discuss this in the related documents about DR data and recovery.
Make your tasks specific
When it's time to run your DR plan, you don't want to be stuck guessing what
each step means. Make each task in your DR plan consist of one or more concrete,
unambiguous commands or actions. For example, "Run the restore script" is too
general. In contrast, "Open a shell and run
/home/example/restore.sh
" is
precise and concrete.
Implementing control measures
Add controls to prevent disasters from occurring and to detect issues
before they occur. For example, add a monitor that sends an alert when a
data-destructive flow, such as a deletion pipeline, exhibits unexpected spikes
or other unusual activity. This monitor could also terminate the pipeline
processes if a certain deletion threshold is reached, preventing a catastrophic
situation.
Preparing your software
Part of your DR planning is to make sure that the software you rely on is ready
for a recovery event.
Verify that you can install your software
Make sure that your application software can be installed from source or from a
preconfigured image. Make sure that you are appropriately licensed for any
software that you will be deploying on Google Cloud—check with the
supplier of the software for guidance.
Make sure that needed Compute Engine resources are available in the
recovery environment. This might require preallocating instances or
reserving
them.
Design continuous deployment for recovery
Your continuous deployment (CD) toolset is an integral component when you are
deploying your applications. As part of your recovery plan, you must consider
where in your recovered environment you will deploy artifacts. Plan where you
want to host your CD environment and artifacts—they need to be available and
operational in the event of a disaster.
Implementing security and compliance controls
When you design a DR plan, security is important. The same controls that
you have in your production environment must apply to your recovered
environment. Compliance regulations will also apply to your recovered
environment.
Configure security the same for the DR and production environments
Make sure that your network controls provide the same separation and blocking
that the source production environment uses. Learn how to configure
Shared VPC
and
firewalls
to let you establish centralized networking and security control of your
deployment, to configure subnets, and to control inbound and outbound traffic.
Understand how to use service accounts to implement least privilege for
applications that access Google Cloud APIs. Make sure to use service
accounts as part of the firewall rules.
Make sure that you grant users the same access to the DR environment that they
have in the source production environment. The following list outlines ways to
synchronize permissions between environments:
If your production environment is Google Cloud, replicating IAM
policies in the DR environment is straightforward. You can use
infrastructure as code (IaC)
tools like
Terraform
to deploy your
IAM
policies to production. You then use the same tools to bind the policies to
corresponding resources in the DR environment as part of the process of
standing up your DR environment.
If your production environment is on-premises, you map the functional
roles, such as your network administrator and auditor roles, to
IAM policies that have the appropriate IAM
roles. The IAM documentation has some example functional role
configurations—for example, see the documentation for creating
networking
and
audit logging
functional roles.
You have to configure IAM policies to grant appropriate
permissions to products. For example, you might want to
restrict access to specific Cloud Storage buckets
.
If your production environment is another cloud provider, map the
permissions in the other provider's IAM policies to Google Cloud IAM
policies.
Verify your DR security
After you've configured permissions for the DR environment, make sure that you
test everything. Create a test environment. Verify that the permissions that you
grant to users match those that the users have on-premises.
Make sure users can access the DR environment
Don't wait for a disaster to occur before checking that your users
can access the DR environment. Make sure that you have granted appropriate
access rights to users, developers, operators, data scientists, security
administrators, network administrators, and any other roles in your
organization. If you are using an alternative identity system, make sure that
accounts have been synced with your Cloud Identity account. Because the DR
environment will be your production environment for a while, get your users who
will need access to the DR environment to sign in, and resolve any
authentication issues. Incorporate users who are logging in to the DR
environment as part of the regular DR tests that you implement.
To centrally manage who has administrative access to virtual machines (VMs) that
are launched, enable the
OS login
feature on the Google Cloud projects that constitute your DR environment.
Train users
Users need to understand how to undertake the actions in Google Cloud that
they're used to accomplishing in the production environment, such as logging in
and accessing VMs. Using the test environment, train your users how to perform
these tasks in ways that safeguard your system's security.
Make sure that the DR environment meets compliance requirements
Verify that access to your DR environment is restricted to only those who need
access. Make sure that PII data is redacted and encrypted. If you perform
regular penetration tests on your production environment, you should include
your DR environment as part of that scope and carry out regular tests by
standing up a DR environment.
Make sure that while your DR environment is in service, any logs that you
collect are backfilled into the log archive of your production environment.
Similarly, make sure that as part of your DR environment, you can export audit
logs that are collected through
Cloud Logging
to your main log sink archive. Use the export sink facilities.
For application logs, create a mirror of your on-premises logging and monitoring
environment. If your production environment is another cloud provider, map that
provider's logging and monitoring to the equivalent Google Cloud services.
Have a process in place to format input into your production environment.
Treat recovered data like production data
Make sure that the security controls that you apply to your production data also
apply to your recovered data: the same permissions, encryption, and audit
requirements should all apply.
Know where your backups are located and who is authorized to restore data. Make
sure your recovery process is auditable—after a disaster recovery, make sure you
can show who had access to the backup data and who performed the
recovery.
Making sure your DR plan works
Make sure that if a disaster does occur, your DR plan works as intended.
Maintain more than one data recovery path
In the event of a disaster, your connection method to Google Cloud might
become unavailable. Implement an alternative means of access to
Google Cloud to help ensure that you can transfer data to
Google Cloud. Regularly test that the backup path is operational.
Test your plan regularly
After you create a DR plan, test it regularly, noting any issues that
come up and adjusting your plan accordingly. Using Google Cloud, you can
test recovery scenarios at minimal cost. We recommend that you implement the
following to help with your testing:
Automate infrastructure provisioning
. You can use IaC tools like
Terraform to automate the provisioning of your Google Cloud
infrastructure. If you're running your production environment on premises,
make sure that you have a monitoring process that can start the DR process
when it detects a failure and can trigger the appropriate recovery actions.
Monitor your environments with Google Cloud Observability
.
Google Cloud has excellent logging and monitoring tools that you can
access through API calls, allowing you to automate the deployment of
recovery scenarios by reacting to metrics. When you're designing tests,
make sure that you have appropriate monitoring and alerting in place that
can trigger appropriate recovery actions.
Perform the testing noted earlier:
Test that permissions and user access work in the DR
environment like they do in the production environment.
Perform penetration testing on your DR environment.
Perform a test in which your usual access path to Google Cloud
doesn't work.
What's next?
Read about
Google Cloud geography and regions
.
Read other documents in this DR series:
Disaster recovery building blocks
Disaster recovery scenarios for data
Disaster recovery scenarios for applications
Architecting disaster recovery for locality-restricted workloads
Disaster recovery use cases: locality-restricted data analytic applications
Architecting disaster recovery for cloud infrastructure outages
For more reference architectures, diagrams, and best practices, explore the
Cloud Architecture Center
.
Contributors
Authors:
Grace Mollison
| Solutions Lead
Marco Ferrari
| Cloud Solutions Architect
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-07-05 UTC.