Landing zone design in Google Cloud  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Landing zone design in Google Cloud
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2026-01-02 UTC
This document provides an overview on how to design landing zones in
Google Cloud. A landing zone, also called a
cloud foundation
, is a modular and scalable configuration that
enables organizations to adopt Google Cloud for their business needs. A
landing zone is often a prerequisite to deploying enterprise workloads in a
cloud environment.
A
landing zone
is not a
zone
or
zonal resources
.
This document is aimed at solutions architects, technical practitioners, and
executive stakeholders who want an overview of the following:
Typical elements of landing zones in Google Cloud
Where to find detailed information on landing zone design
How to deploy a landing zone for your enterprise, including options to
deploy pre-built solutions
This document is part of a series that helps you understand how to design and
build a landing zone. The other documents in this series help guide you
through the high-level decisions that you need to make when you design your
organization's landing zone. In this series, you learn about the following:
Landing zone design in Google Cloud (this document)
Decide how to onboard identities to Google Cloud
Decide the resource hierarchy for your Google Cloud landing zone
Decide the network design for your Google Cloud landing zone
Decide the security for your Google Cloud landing zone
This series does not specifically address compliance requirements from
regulated industries such as financial services or healthcare.
What is a Google Cloud landing zone?
Landing zones help your enterprise deploy, use, and scale Google Cloud
services more securely. Landing zones are dynamic and grow as your enterprise
adopts more cloud-based workloads over time.
To deploy a landing zone, you must first
create an organization resource
and
create a billing account
,
either online or invoiced.
A landing zone spans multiple areas and includes different elements, such as
identities, resource management, security, and networking. Many other elements
can also be part of a landing zone, as described in
Elements of a landing zone
.
The following diagram shows a sample implementation of a landing zone. It shows
an Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) use case with hybrid cloud and on-premises
connectivity in Google Cloud:
The example architecture in the preceding diagram shows a Google Cloud
landing zone that includes the following Google Cloud services and
features:
Resource Manager defines a
resource hierarchy
with
organizational policies.
A
Cloud Identity
account synchronizes with an on-premises identity provider and
Identity and Access Management (IAM)
providing granular access to Google Cloud resources.
A network deployment that includes the following:
A
Shared VPC
network for each environment (production, development, and testing)
connects resources from multiple projects to the VPC network.
Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) firewall rules
control connectivity to and from workloads in the
Shared VPC
networks.
A
Cloud NAT
gateway allows outbound connections to the internet from resources in
these networks without external IP addresses.
Cloud Interconnect
connects on-premises applications and users. (You can
choose between different Cloud Interconnect options, including
Dedicated Interconnect
or
Partner Interconnect
.)
Cross-Cloud Interconnect
(or
Cloud VPN
)
connects to other cloud service providers.
A
Cloud DNS
private zone hosts DNS records for your deployments in Google Cloud.
Multiple service projects are configured to use the
Shared VPC
networks. These service projects host your application resources.
Google Cloud Observability
includes
Cloud Monitoring
for monitoring and
Cloud Logging
for logging.
Cloud Audit Logs
,
Firewall Rules Logging
and
VPC Flow Logs
help ensure all necessary data is logged and available for analysis.
A
VPC Service Controls
perimeter isolates service and resources,
which helps to mitigate the risk of data egress to Google Cloud
services outside the perimeter. Traffic from hybrid environments is
configured with authorized private access to communicate with services
inside the perimeter.
The diagram above is only an example, because there is no single or standard
implementation of a landing zone. Your business must make many design choices,
depending on different factors, including the following:
Your industry
Your organizational structure and processes
Your security and compliance requirements
The workloads that you want to move to Google Cloud
Your existing IT infrastructure and other cloud environments
The location of your business and customers
When to build a landing zone
We recommend that you build a landing zone before you deploy your first
enterprise workload on Google Cloud, because a landing zone provides the
following:
A foundation that's designed to be secure
The network for enterprise workloads
The tools that you require to govern your internal cost distribution
However, because a landing zone is modular, your first iteration of a landing
zone is often not your final version. Therefore, we recommend that you design a
landing zone with scalability and growth in mind. For example, if your first
workload does not require access to on-premises network resources, you could
build connectivity to your on-premises environment later.
Depending on your organization and the type of workloads that you plan to run on
Google Cloud, some workloads might have very different requirements. For
example, some workloads might have unique scalability or compliance
requirements. In these cases, you might require more than one landing zone for
your organization: one landing zone to host most of the workloads and a separate
landing zone to host the unique workloads. You can share some elements such as
identities, billing, and the organization resource  across your landing zones.
However, other elements, such as the network setup, deployment mechanisms, and
folder-level policies, might vary.
Elements of a landing zone
A landing zone requires you to design the following core elements on
Google Cloud:
Identity provisioning
Resource hierarchy
Network
Security controls
In addition to these core elements, your business might have additional
requirements. The following table describes these elements and where you can
find more information about them.
Landing zone element
Description
Monitoring and logging
Design a monitoring and logging strategy that helps ensure all
relevant data is logged and that you have dashboards that visualize
the data and alerts that notify you of any actionable exceptions.
For more information, see
Google Cloud Observability documentation
Backup and disaster recovery
Design a strategy for backups and disaster recovery.
For more information, see the following:
Disaster recovery planning guide
Backup and DR Service
Compliance
Follow the compliance frameworks that are relevant to your
organization.
For more information, see the
Compliance resource center
.
Cost efficiency and control
Design capabilities to monitor and optimize cost for workloads in your landing zone.
For more information, see the following:
Overview of cloud billing concepts
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework: Cost
optimization
Cost management
API management
Design a scalable solution for APIs that you develop. For more information,
see
Apigee API
Management
.
Cluster management
Design Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) clusters that follow best
practices to build scalable, resilient, and observable services.
For more information, see the following:
GKE best practices
GKE Autopilot mode
Multi-cluster Services
About Cloud Service Mesh
Best practices for designing and deploying a landing zone
Designing and deploying a landing zone requires planning. You must have the
right team to perform the tasks, and use a project management process. We also recommend that you follow
the technical best practices that are described in this series.
Build a team
Bring together a team that includes people from multiple technical functions
across the organization. The team must include people who can build all landing
zone elements, including security, identity, networks, and operations. Identify
a cloud practitioner who understands Google Cloud to lead the team. Your
team should include members who manage the project and track achievements, and
members who collaborate with application or business owners.
Make sure that all stakeholders are involved early in the process. Your
stakeholders  must come to a common understanding of the scope of the process
and make high-level decisions when the project gets kicked off.
Apply project management to your landing zone deployment
Designing and deploying your landing zone can take multiple weeks, so project
management is essential. Ensure that project goals are clearly defined and
communicated to all stakeholders and that all parties receive updates on any
project changes. Define regular checkpoints and agree on milestones with
realistic timelines that take operational processes and unexpected delays into
account.
To best align with business requirements, plan the initial landing zone
deployment around the use cases that you want to deploy first in
Google Cloud. We recommend that you first deploy workloads that can most
easily run on Google Cloud, such as horizontally scaling multi-tier web
applications. These workloads might be new or existing workloads. To
assess existing workloads for migration readiness, see
Migration to Google Cloud: Getting started
.
Because landing zones are modular, center the initial design around the elements
that are required to migrate your first workloads and plan to add other elements
later.
Follow technical best practices
Consider using
Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
,
with, for example,
Terraform
.
IaC helps you make your deployment repeatable and modular. Having a
CI/CD pipeline that deploys cloud infrastructure changes
using
GitOps helps you ensure that you follow internal guidelines and put the right
controls in place.
When you design your landing zone, ensure that you and your team take technical
best practices into consideration. For more information on decisions to make in
your landing zone, see the other guides in this series.
In addition to this series, the following table describes frameworks, guides,
and blueprints that can also help you follow best practices, depending on your
use cases.
Related documentation
Description
Google Cloud Setup
A high-level guided flow to help you set up Google Cloud for scalable,
production-ready, enterprise workloads.
Enterprise foundation
blueprint
An opinionated view of Google Cloud security best
practices, aimed at CISO, security practitioners, risk managers, or
compliance officers.
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
Recommendations and best practices to help architects,
developers, administrators, and other cloud practitioners design and
operate a cloud topology that's secure, efficient, resilient,
high-performing, and cost-effective.
Terraform blueprints
A list of blueprints and modules that are packaged as Terraform
modules and that you can use to  create resources for
Google Cloud.
Identify resources to help implement your landing zone
Google Cloud offers the following options to help you set up your landing
zone:
Design and deploy a landing zone that is customized to your requirements with
Google Cloud
partners
or Google Cloud
professional services
.
Onboard a workload with the
Google Cloud
Customer Onboarding program
.
Deploy a generic landing zone with the
setup guide in the Google Cloud console
.
Deploy a highly opinionated landing zone by using the
Terraform example foundation
.
All these offerings have approaches that are designed specifically to meet the needs of different industries and business sizes, across the globe. To help you make the best selection for your use case, we recommend that you work with your
Google Cloud account team to make the selection and help to ensure
a successful project.
What's next
Decide how to onboard identities to Google Cloud
(next document in this series).
Decide the resource hierarchy for your Google Cloud landing zone
.
Decide the network design for your Google Cloud landing zone
.
Decide the security for your Google Cloud landing zone
.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2026-01-02 UTC.