Best practices and reference architectures for VPC design  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Best practices and reference architectures for VPC design
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-01-30 UTC
This guide introduces best practices and typical enterprise architectures for
the design of
Virtual Private Cloud (VPC)
with Google Cloud. This guide is for cloud network architects and
system architects who are already familiar with Google Cloud networking
concepts.
General principles and first steps
Best practices
:
Identify decision makers, timelines, and pre-work
.
Consider VPC network design early
.
Keep it simple
.
Use clear naming conventions
.
Identify decision makers, timelines, and pre-work
As a first step in your VPC network design, identify the decision makers, timelines,
and pre-work necessary to ensure that you can address stakeholder
requirements.
Stakeholders might include application owners, security architects, solution
architects, and operations managers. The stakeholders themselves might change
depending on whether you are planning your VPC network for a
project, a line of business, or the entire organization.
Part of the pre-work is to get the team acquainted with concepts and
terminology around VPC network design. Useful documents include the
following:
Resource Manager documentation
Identity and Access Management (IAM) documentation
Virtual Private Cloud documentation
Consider VPC network design early
Make VPC network design an early part of designing your
organizational setup in Google Cloud. It can be disruptive to your
organization if you later need to change fundamental things such as how your
network is segmented or where your workloads are located.
Different VPC network configurations can have significant
implications for routing, scale, and security. Careful planning and deep
understanding of your specific considerations helps you to create a solid
architectural foundation for incremental workloads.
Keep it simple
Keeping the design of your VPC network topology simple is the best way to ensure a
manageable, reliable, and well-understood architecture.
Use clear naming conventions
Make your naming conventions simple, intuitive, and consistent. This ensures
that administrators and end users understand the purpose of each resource, where
it is located, and how it is differentiated from other resources.
Commonly accepted abbreviations of long words help with brevity. Using familiar
terminology where possible helps with readability.
Consider the components illustrated in the following example when establishing
your naming conventions:
Company name
: Acme Company:
acmeco
Business unit
: Human Resources:
hr
Application code
: Compensation system:
comp
Region code
: northamerica-northeast1:
na-ne1
, europe-west1:
eu-we1
Environment codes
:
dev
,
test
,
uat
,
stage
,
prod
In this example, the development environment for the human resources
department's compensation system is named
acmeco-hr-comp-eu-we1-dev
.
For other common networking resources, consider patterns like these:
VPC network
syntax:
{company name}-{description(App or BU)-label}-{environment-label}-{seq#}
example:
acmeco-hr-dev-vpc-1
Subnet
syntax:
{company-name}-{description(App or BU)-label}-{region-label}-{environment-label}-{subnet-label}
example:
acmeco-hr-na-ne1-dev-vpc-1-subnet-1
note: If a subnet contains resources in one zone only, you can use "zone-label" instead of "region-label."
Firewall rule
syntax:
{company-name}-{description(App or BU)-label}{source-label}-{dest-label}-{protocol}-{port}-{action}
example:
acmeco-hr-internet-internal-tcp-80-allow-rule
IP route
syntax:
{priority}-{VPC-label}-{tag}-{next hop}
example:
1000-acmeco-hr-dev-vpc-1-int-gw
Addresses and subnets
Best practices
:
Use custom mode subnets in your enterprise VPC networks
.
Group applications into fewer subnets with larger address ranges
.
Use custom mode VPC networks
Though auto mode networks can be useful for early exploration, custom mode
VPC networks are better suited for most production environments.
We recommend that enterprises use VPC networks in custom mode
from the beginning for the following reasons:
Custom mode VPC networks better integrate into existing IP
address management schemes. Because all auto mode networks use the same
set of internal IP ranges, auto mode IP ranges might overlap when connected
with your on-premises corporate networks.
You can't connect two auto mode VPC networks together using
VPC Network Peering because their subnets use identical primary IP ranges.
Auto mode subnets all have the same name as the network. You can choose
unique, descriptive names for custom mode subnets, making
your VPC networks more understandable and maintainable.
When a new Google Cloud region is introduced, auto mode
VPC networks automatically get a new subnet in that region.
Custom mode VPC networks only get new subnets if you specify
them. This can be important for both sovereignty and IP address management
reasons.
If it has no resources, you can
delete
the
default
network. You cannot delete a VPC network until you have
removed all resources, including Virtual Machine (VM) instances, that depend on
it.
For more details of the differences between auto mode and custom mode
VPC networks, see the
VPC network overview
.
Group applications into fewer subnets with larger address ranges
Conventionally, some enterprise networks are separated into many small address
ranges for a variety of reasons. For example, this might have been done to
identify or isolate an application or keep a small broadcast domain.
However, we recommend that you group applications of the same type into fewer,
more manageable subnets with larger address ranges in the regions you want to
operate.
Unlike other networking environments in which a subnet mask is used,
Google Cloud uses a software-defined networking (SDN) approach to provide
a full mesh of reachability between all VMs in the global VPC network.
The number of subnets does not affect routing behaviour.
You can use service accounts or network tags to apply specific routing policies
or firewall rules. Identity in Google Cloud is not based solely on the
subnet IP address.
Some VPC features—including
Cloud NAT
,
Private Google Access
,
VPC Flow Logs
,
and
alias IP ranges
—are
configured per subnet. If you need more fine-grained control of these features,
use additional subnets.
Single VPC network and Shared VPC
Best practices
:
Start with a single VPC network for resources that have common requirements
.
Use Shared VPC for administration of multiple working groups
.
Grant the network user role at the subnet level
.
Use a single host project if resources require multiple network interfaces
.
Use multiple host projects if resource requirements exceed the quota of a single project
.
Use multiple host projects if you need separate administration policies for each VPC
.
Start with a single VPC network for resources that have common requirements
For many simple use cases, a single VPC network provides the features that you need,
while being easier to create, maintain, and understand than the more complex
alternatives. By grouping resources with common requirements and characteristics
into a single VPC network, you begin to establish the
VPC network border as the perimeter for potential issues.
For an example of this configuration, see the
single project, single VPC network
reference architecture.
Factors that might lead you to create additional VPC networks
include scale, network security, financial considerations, operational
requirements, and identity and access management (IAM).
Use Shared VPC for administration of multiple working groups
For organizations with multiple teams,
Shared VPC
provides an effective tool to extend the architectural simplicity of a single
VPC network across multiple working groups.
The simplest approach is to deploy a single Shared VPC host project with a
single Shared VPC network and then attach team service projects to the host project network.
In this configuration, network policy and control for all networking resources
are centralized and easier to manage. Service project departments can configure
and manage non-network resources, enabling a clear separation of
responsibilities for different teams in the organization.
Resources in those projects can communicate with each other more securely and
efficiently across project boundaries using internal IP addresses. You can
manage shared network resources—such as subnets, routes, and firewalls—from a
central host project, so you can enforce consistent network policies across the
projects.
For an example of this configuration, see the
Single host project, multiple service projects, single Shared VPC
reference architecture.
Grant the network user role at the subnet level
The centralized Shared VPC administrator can grant members the network user
(
networkUser
)
role either at a subnet level, for fine-grained service-project authorization,
or for all subnets at the host project level.
Following the principle of least privilege, we recommend granting the network
user role at the subnet level to the associated user, service account, or
group.
Because subnets are regional, this granular control lets you specify which
regions each service project can use to deploy resources.
With Shared VPC architectures, you also have the flexibility to deploy multiple
Shared VPC host projects within your organization. Each Shared VPC host project
can then accommodate a single or multiple Shared VPC networks. In this
configuration, different environments can enforce different policy
concerns.
For more information, see
IAM roles for networking
.
Use a single host project if resources require multiple network interfaces
If you have a service project that needs to deploy resources to multiple
isolated VPC networks—for example, VM instances with multiple
network interfaces—your host project must contain all of the VPC
networks that provide the services. This is because a service project is
allowed to attach to only one host project.
Use multiple host projects if resource requirements exceed the quota of a single project
In cases where the aggregate resource requirements of all VPC networks can't be met
within a project's quota, use an architecture with multiple host projects with a
single Shared VPC network per host project, rather than a single host project with
multiple Shared VPC networks. It's important to evaluate your scale requirements,
because using a single host project requires multiple VPC networks in the host project, and
quotas are enforced at the project level.
For an example of this configuration, see the
Multiple host projects, multiple service projects, multiple Shared VPC reference architecture
.
Use multiple host projects if you need separate administration policies for each VPC network
Because each project has its own quota, use a separate Shared VPC host
project for every VPC network to scale aggregate resources. This allows each
VPC network to have separate IAM permissions for networking and security management,
because IAM permissions are also implemented at the project level. For example,
if you deploy two VPC networks (VPC network A and VPC network B) into the same host project, the
network administrator
(
networkAdmin
)
role applies to both VPC networks.
Deciding whether to create multiple VPC networks
Best practices
:
Create a single VPC network per project to map VPC network quotas to projects
.
Create a VPC network for each autonomous team, with shared services in a common VPC network
.
Create VPC networks in different projects for independent IAM controls
.
Isolate sensitive data in its own VPC network
.
Create a single VPC network per project to map VPC resource quotas to projects
Quotas
are constraints applied at the project or network level. All resources
have an initial default quota meant to protect you from unexpected resource usage.
However, many factors might lead you to want more quota. For most resources,
you can
request additional quota
.
We recommend creating a single VPC network per project if you expect to grow beyond the
default VPC resource quotas. This makes it easier to map project-level quota
increases to each VPC network rather than to a combination of VPC networks in the same project.
Limits
are designed to protect system
resources in aggregate. Limits generally can't be raised easily, although
Google Cloud support and sales teams can work with you to increase some
limits.
See
VPC resource quotas and limits
for current values.
Google Support can increase some scaling limits, but there might be times when
you need to build multiple VPC networks to meet your scaling requirements. If your VPC network
has a requirement to scale beyond the limits, discuss your case with
Google Cloud sales and support teams about the best approach for your
requirements.
Create a VPC network for each autonomous team, with shared services in a common VPC network
Some large enterprise deployments involve autonomous teams that each
require full control over their respective VPC networks. You can meet this requirement
by creating a VPC network for each business unit, with shared services in a common VPC network
(for example, analytic tools, CI/CD pipeline and build machines, DNS/Directory
services).
Create VPC networks in different projects for independent IAM controls
A VPC network is a project-level resource with fine-grained, project-level
identity and access management (IAM) controls
,
including the following roles:
networkAdmin
securityAdmin
networkUser
networkViewer
By default, IAM controls are deployed at the project level and each IAM
role applies to all VPC networks within the project.
If you require independent IAM controls per VPC network, create your VPC networks in different
projects.
If you require IAM roles scoped to specific Compute Engine resources such as
VM instances, disks, and images, use
IAM policies for Compute Engine resources
.
Isolate sensitive data in its own VPC network
For companies that deal with compliance initiatives, sensitive data, or highly
regulated data that is bound by compliance standards such as HIPAA or PCI-DSS,
further security measures often make sense. One method that can improve security
and make it easier to prove compliance is to isolate each of these environments
into its own VPC network.
Connecting multiple VPC networks
Best practices
:
Choose the VPC connection method that meets your cost, performance, and security needs
.
Use NCC VPC spokes
.
Use VPC Network Peering if you need to insert NVAs or if your application doesn't support Private Service Connect
.
Use external routing if you don't need private IP address communication
.
Use Cloud VPN to connect VPC networks that host service access points that are not transitively reachable over NCC
.
Use multi-NIC virtual appliances to control traffic between VPC networks through a cloud device
.
Choose the VPC connection method that meets your cost, performance, and security needs
The next step after deciding to implement multiple VPC networks is connecting those
VPC networks. VPC networks are isolated tenant spaces within Google's
Andromeda
SDN, but there are several ways that you can enable communication between them. The
subsequent sections provide best practices for choosing a VPC connection method.
The
advantages and disadvantages of each are summarized in the following table, and
subsequent sections provide best practices for choosing a VPC connection
method.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Network Connectivity Center VPC spokes
Up to 250 active VPC spokes per hub.
Export filters.
Preset topologies.
Maximum per-VPC VM instance scale without separate peering group quotas.
Hub-administrator to spoke administrator workflow for cross-organizational VPC connectivity.
Private Service Connect connection propagation enables transitive reachability of Private Service Connect end-points across VPC spokes.
Plus all the benefits of VPC Network Peering.
Source tags and source service accounts of the sending VM are not propagated across sNCC.
Limited NVA insertion options.
Inter-VPC transit costs.
VPC Network Peering
Easy to configure.
Low management overhead.
High bandwidth.
Low egress charges (same as single VPC network).
Each VPC network maintains its own distributed firewall.
Each VPC network maintains its own IAM accounts and permissions.
Non-transitive.
Scaling numbers are bound to the
aggregate
group of peered
VPC networks. This includes the number of VMs, routes, and internal forwarding rules.
Requires non-overlapping address space.
Static and dynamic routes are not propagated.
Source tags and source service accounts of the sending VM are not propagated
across VPC Network Peering.
External
routing
(public IP
or NAT gateway)
No configuration needed.
Full isolation between VPC networks.
Overlapping IP address space is possible.
High bandwidth.
Egress charges for VMs within the same zone are higher than for
  other options, such as VPC Network Peering.
VMs need to be exposed using external IP addresses.
No firewalling using private IP addresses.
Static and dynamic routes are not propagated.
Source tags and source service accounts of the sending VM are not honored by
peered networks.
Cloud VPN
Cloud VPN enables transitive topologies for hub and spoke.
Scalable through ECMP.
99.99% service availability SLA on HA VPN.
Management overhead.
Billed at internet egress rates.
Slightly higher latency.
Limited
throughput per tunnel
.
Lower MTU because of additional tunnel encapsulation.
Source tags and source service accounts of the sending VM are lost
across the tunnel.
Multiple
network interfaces
(Multi-NIC)
Scalable through managed instance groups and ECMP routes across
instances.
Individual VMs have
bandwidth limits
.
Limited
number of interfaces
per VM instance.
You have to manage the VM instances yourself.
Use NCC VPC spokes
We recommend that you use
NCC VPC spokes
when you need to connect VPC networks together. NCC VPC spokes allow for address re-use across VPCs in the same project and organization or in a different project and organization.
NCC VPC spokes is the preferred method for connecting VPC networks for the following reasons:
The data plane is distributed, so there is no gateway bottleneck. Traffic travels across VPC networks as if the VMs were in the same VPC network.
Inter-network connectivity across different organizations. Networks include VPCs as well as external networks.
Up to 250 VPC networks per hub.
Transitive reachability across VPCs of service access points.
Integrated inter-VPC Cloud NAT to enable IP address re-use across VPCs.
Defined network reachability rules using pre-set topologies and prefix filters.
Use VPC Network Peering if you need to insert NVAs or if your application doesn't support Private Service Connect
We recommend that you use VPC Network Peering if you need to insert network virtual appliances (NVAs), such as firewall VMs. You might need to insert NVAs for traffic that traverses multiple VPC networks or for private connectivity to services that aren't published by using Private Service Connect.
When you use VPC Network Peering, ensure that the totals of the resources
needed for all directly connected peers don't exceed the
limits
on VM instances, number of peering
connections, and internal forwarding rules.
VPC Network Peering enables two VPC networks to connect with
each other internally over Google's SDN, whether or not they belong to the same
project or the same organization. VPC Network Peering merges the control
plane and flow propagation between each peer, allowing the same forwarding
characteristics as if all the VMs were in the same VPC network.
When VPC networks are peered, all subnets, alias IP ranges, and
internal forwarding rules are accessible, and each VPC network
maintains its own distributed firewall. VPC Network Peering is not
transitive.
Use external routing if you don't need private IP address communication
If you don't need private IP address communication, you can use external
routing with external IP addresses or a NAT gateway.
When a VPC network is deployed, a route to Google's default internet gateway is
provisioned with a priority of 1000. If this route exists, and a VM is given an
external IP address, VMs can send outbound (egress) traffic through Google's
internet gateway. You can also deploy services behind one of Google's many
public load-balancing offerings, which allows the services to be reached
externally.
Externally addressed VMs communicate with each other privately over Google's
backbone, regardless of region
and
Network Service Tiers
.
Use Google Cloud firewall rules to control external inbound (ingress) traffic to
your VMs.
External routing is a good option for scaling purposes, but it's important to
understand how public routing affects costs. For details, see the
Network pricing documentation
.
Use Cloud VPN to connect VPC networks that host service access points that are not transitively reachable over NCC
HA VPN provides a managed service to connect VPC networks by creating
IPsec tunnels between sets of endpoints. If you configure your Cloud Routers
with custom advertisement mode, you can enable transitive routing across VPC networks
and hub-and-spoke topologies as described later in this document.
Using Network Connectivity Center, you can use HA VPN tunnels as a
transit network between on-premises networks, as explained in the
Cloud VPN documentation
.
Cloud VPN does not support large MTU. For details, see
MTU considerations
.
Use virtual appliances to control traffic between VPC networks through a cloud device
Multiple network interface VMs are common for VPC networks that require
additional security or services between them, because multiple network interface VMs enable VM
instances to bridge communication between VPC networks.
To deploy a VM into multiple VPC networks, you must have the
appropriate IAM permission for each VPC network to which the VM connects.
When you deploy a multi-NIC VM between VPC networks, remember that the
subnet IP ranges of the interfaces must not overlap.
Service connectivity
Private Service Connect
allows
consumers
to access
services
privately from inside their
VPC network without the need for a network oriented deployment
model. Similarly, it lets
producers
host these services in their own
separate VPC networks, and they can offer a private connection to
 their consumers within the same organization or across organizations.
Private Service Connect enables connectivity to first-party and third-party
managed services, which eliminates the needs for subnet allocation for private
services access and VPC Network Peering.
Private Service Connect offers a service-centric security model with the following benefits:
No shared dependencies
Explicit authorization
Line-rate performance
Private Service Connect is available in different types that provide different capabilities and modes of communication:
Private Service Connect
endpoints
: Endpoints are
deployed by using forwarding rules that provide the consumer an IP address
that is mapped to the Private Service Connect service.
Private Service Connect
backends
: Backends are deployed
by using network endpoint groups (NEGs) that let consumers direct traffic to
their load balancer before the traffic reaches a Private Service Connect
service. If the backends are deployed with an HTTPS load balancer, they can
support certificates.
Private Service Connect
interfaces
: Interfaces
let the consumer and producer originate traffic, which enables
bidirectional communication. Interfaces can be used in the same VPC
network as endpoints and backends.
An alternative to Private Service Connect is
private services
access
that allows consumers to connect the producer services through
VPC Network Peering. When you use private services access, we recommend that
you consider IP allocation for each producer service, IP overlap, and shared
quota.
Hybrid design: connecting an on-premises environment
Best practices
:
Use dynamic routing when possible
.
Use a connectivity VPC network to scale a hub-and-spoke architecture with multiple VPC networks
.
After you have identified the need for
hybrid connectivity
and have chosen a solution that meets your bandwidth, performance, and security
requirements, consider how to integrate it into your VPC design.
Using
Shared VPC
alleviates the need for each project to replicate the same solution. For
example, when you integrate a Cloud Interconnect solution into a
Shared VPC, all VMs—regardless of region or service project—can access the
Cloud Interconnect connection.
Use dynamic routing when possible
Dynamic routing is available on all hybrid solutions, including
HA VPN, Classic VPN, Dedicated Interconnect, and
Partner Interconnect. Dynamic routing uses Google's
Cloud Router as a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) speaker to provide dynamic
External BGP (eBGP) routing.
The Cloud Router is not in the data plane; it only creates routes in
the SDN.
Dynamic routing does not use tags, and the Cloud Router never
re-advertises learned prefixes.
You can enable either of the Cloud Router's two modes, regional or
global, on each VPC network. If you choose regional routing, the Cloud Router
only advertises subnets that co-reside in the region where the
Cloud Router is deployed. Global routing, on the other hand, advertises
all subnets of the given VPC network, regardless of region, but does penalize routes that are advertised
and learned outside of the region. This maintains symmetry within the region by
always preferring a local interconnect, and is calculated by adding a penalty
metric (MED) equal to 200 + TTL in milliseconds between regions.
Static routing
Static routing is only available on Classic VPN. Static routing offers
the ability to set a next-hop route pointing at a Cloud VPN tunnel.
By default, a static route applies to all VMs in the network regardless of region. Static
routing also lets network administrators selectively set which VMs the route
applies to by using instance tags, which can be specified when you create a
route.
Static routes apply globally within the VPC network, with the same route priority as
each other. Therefore, if you have multiple tunnels in multiple regions to the
same prefix with the same priority, a VM will use 5-tuple hash-based ECMP across
all tunnels. To optimize this setup, you can create a preferred in-region route
by referencing instance tags for each region and creating preferred routes
accordingly.
If you don't want outbound (egress) traffic to go through Google's default
internet gateway, you can set a preferred default static route to send all
traffic back on-premises through a tunnel.
Use a connectivity VPC network to scale a hub-and-spoke architecture with multiple VPC networks
If you need to scale a hub-and-spoke architecture with multiple VPC networks,
configure centralized hybrid connectivity in one or more dedicated VPC networks,
then add the hybrid connections and all of the VPC spokes to a NCC hub.
You'll need to enable
route exchange with VPC
spokes
.
This configuration allows static routes or dynamically learned routes to be exported to VPC spokes in
order to provide centralized configuration and scale to your VPC network design.
The following diagram illustrates a centralized hybrid connectivity design
using NCC:
Alternatively, you can use VPC Network Peering and custom advertised routes
to provide access to shared hybrid connections, if you won't exceed resource
limits and you require the use of NVAs.
The following diagram illustrates centralized hybrid connectivity with
VPC Network Peering custom routes:
This centralized design is in contrast to conventional hybrid connectivity deployment, which uses
VPN tunnels or VLAN attachments in each individual VPC network.
Network security
Best practices
:
Identify clear security objectives
.
Limit external access
.
Define service perimeters for sensitive data
.
Manage traffic with Google Cloud firewall rules when possible
.
Use fewer, broader firewall rule sets when possible
.
Isolate VMs using service accounts when possible
.
Use automation to monitor security policies when using tags
.
Use additional tools to help secure and protect your apps
.
Google Cloud provides robust security features across its infrastructure
and services, from the physical security of data centers and custom security
hardware to dedicated teams of researchers. However, securing your
Google Cloud resources is a shared responsibility. You must take
appropriate measures to help ensure that your apps and data are protected.
Identify clear security objectives
Before evaluating either cloud-native or cloud-capable security controls, start
with a set of clear security objectives that all stakeholders
agree to as a fundamental part of the product. These objectives should emphasize
achievability, documentation, and iteration, so that they can be referenced and
improved throughout development.
Limit external access
When you create a Google Cloud resource that uses a VPC network, you
choose a network and subnet where the resource resides. The resource is assigned
an internal IP address from one of the IP ranges associated with the subnet.
Resources in a VPC network can communicate among themselves through internal IP
addresses if firewall rules permit.
Limit access to the internet to only those resources that need it. Resources
with only a private, internal IP address can still access many Google APIs and
services through Private Service Connect or
Private Google Access. Private access enables
resources to interact with key Google and Google Cloud services while
remaining isolated from the public internet.
Additionally, use
organizational policies
to further restrict which resources are allowed to use external IP addresses.
To allow VMs to access the internet, use Secure Web Proxy if the traffic can be
downloaded over HTTP(S) and you want to implement identity controls. Otherwise,
use Cloud NAT.
Define service perimeters for sensitive data
For workloads involving sensitive data, use
VPC Service Controls
to configure service perimeters around your VPC resources and Google-managed
services and control the movement of data across the perimeter boundary. Using
VPC Service Controls, you can group projects and your on-premises network into
a single perimeter that prevents data access through Google-managed services.
Service perimeters can't contain projects from different organizations, but
you can use perimeter bridges to allow projects and services in different
service perimeters to communicate.
Manage traffic with Google Cloud firewall rules when possible
Google Cloud VPC includes a stateful firewall that is horizontally
scalable and applied to each VM in a distributed manner. See the
Cloud NGFW overview
for details.
Google Cloud Marketplace features a large ecosystem of third-party solutions,
including VMs that do the following: provide advanced security, such as
protection from information leakage, application exploits, and escalation of
privileges; detect known and unknown threats; and apply URL filtering. There are
also operational benefits to having a single vendor implement policy across
cloud service providers and on-premises environments.
Traffic is typically routed to these VMs by specifying routes, either with
the same priority (to distribute the traffic using a 5-tuple hash) or with
different priorities (to create a redundant path), as shown in the multiple
paths to the Dev-subnet in the following diagram.
Most solutions require multiple network interface VMs.
Scale is also an important consideration when deploying third-party solutions
into your VPC network for the following reasons:
Limits: Most VM-based appliances must be inserted into the data
path. This requires a multiple network interface VM that bridges multiple VPC networks that reside in
the same project. Because VPC resource quotas are set at the project level, the
aggregate resource needs across all VPC networks can become limiting.
Performance: Introducing a single VM-based chokepoint into the fully
horizontal scalability attributes of a VPC network goes against cloud design
methodologies. To mitigate this, you can place multiple network virtual
appliances (NVAs) into a managed instance group behind an internal passthrough Network Load Balancer.
To account for these factors in high-scale requirement architectures, push
security controls to your endpoints. Start by hardening your VMs and using Google Cloud
firewall rules. This strategy can also involve introducing host-based endpoint
inspection agents that don't change the forwarding architecture of your VPC network
through multiple network interface VMs.
For an additional example of this configuration, see the
Stateful L7 firewall between VPC networks reference architecture
.
Use fewer, broader firewall rule sets when possible
Only a certain number of rules can be programmed on any
VM. However, you can combine many rules into one complex rule
definition. For example, if all VMs in the VPC network need to explicitly allow 10
ingress TCP ports, you have two options: write 10 separate rules, each defining
a single port, or define a single rule that includes all 10 ports. Defining a
single rule that includes all 10 ports is the more efficient option.
Create a generic rule set that applies to the entire VPC network, and then use more
specific rule sets for smaller groupings of VMs using
targets
.
In other words, start by defining broad rules, and progressively define rules
more narrowly as needed:
Apply firewall rules that are common across all VMs in the VPC network.
Apply firewall rules that can be grouped across several VMs, like a
service instance group or subnet.
Apply firewall rules to individual VMs, such as a NAT gateway or bastion
host.
Isolate VMs using service accounts when possible
Many organizations have environments that require specific rules for a
subset of the VMs in a VPC network. There are two common approaches that you can take in
these cases: subnet isolation and target filtering.
Subnet isolation
With subnet isolation, the
subnet
forms the security boundary across which Google Cloud firewall rules are applied.
This approach is common in on-premises networking constructs and in cases where
IP addresses and network placement form part of the VM identity.
You can identify the VMs on a specific subnet by
applying a unique
Tag
, network tag, or
service account to those instances. This lets you create firewall rules that
only apply to the VMs in a subnet—those with
the associated Tag, network tag, service account. For example, to create a firewall
rule that permits all communication between VMs in the same subnet, you can use
the following rule configuration on the
Firewall rules page
:
Targets
:
Specified target tags
Target tags
:
subnet-1
Source filter
:
Subnets
Subnets
: Select subnet by name (example:
subnet-1
).
Target filtering
With target filtering, all VMs either reside on the same subnet or are part
of an arbitrary set of subnets. With this approach, subnet membership is not
considered part of the instance identity for firewall rules. Instead, you can
use Tags, network tags, or service accounts to restrict access between VMs in the same
subnet. Each group of VMs that uses the same firewall rules has the same network
tag applied.
To illustrate this, consider a three-tier (web, app, database) application for
which all of the instances are deployed in the same subnet. The web tier can
communicate with end users and the app tier, and the app tier can communicate
with the database tier, but no other communication between tiers is allowed. The
instances running the web tier have a network tag of
web
, the instances
running the app tier have a network tag of
app
, and the instances running the
database tier have a network tag of
db
.
The following firewall rules implement this approach:
Rule 1: Permit end-users → web tier
Targets
:
Specified target tags
Target tags
:
web
Source filter
:
IP ranges
Source IP ranges
:
0.0.0.0/0
Rule 2: Permit web tier → app tier
Targets
:
Specified target tags
Target tags
:
app
Source filter
:
Source tags
Source tags
:
web
Rule 3: Permit app tier → database tier
Targets
:
Specified target tags
Target tags
:
db
Source filter
:
Source tags
Source tags
:
app
However, even though it is possible to use network tags for target filtering in this
manner, we recommend that you use Tags or service accounts where possible. Target tags
are not access-controlled and can be changed by someone with the
instanceAdmin
role while VMs are in service. Tags and service accounts are access-controlled, meaning
that a specific user must be explicitly authorized to use a service account.
There can only be one service account per instance, whereas there can be
multiple tags. Also, service accounts assigned to a VM can only be changed when
the VM is stopped.
Use automation to monitor security policies when using tags
If you use network tags, remember that an instance administrator can change those tags.
This can circumvent security policy. Therefore, if you do use network tags in a
production environment, use an automation framework to help you overcome the
lack of IAM governance over the network tags.
Use additional tools to help secure and protect your apps
In addition to firewall rules, use these additional tools to help secure and
protect your apps:
Use a Google Cloud global
HTTP(S) load balancer
to support high availability and protocol normalization.
Integrate
Google Cloud Armor
with the HTTP(S) load balancer to provide DDoS protection and the ability
to block or allow IP addresses at the network edge.
Control access to apps by using
IAP
(IAP) to verify user identity and the context of the request
to determine if a user should be granted access.
Provide a single interface for security insights, anomaly detection, and
vulnerability detection with
Security Command Center
.
Network services: NAT and DNS
Best practices
:
Use fixed external IP addresses with Cloud NAT
.
Reuse IP addresses across VPCs with Cloud NAT
.
Use Private DNS zones for name resolution
.
Use fixed external IP addresses with Cloud NAT
If you need fixed external IP addresses from a range of VMs, use
Cloud NAT
.
An example of why you might need fixed outbound IP addresses is the case in
which a third party allows requests from specific external IP addresses. Using
Cloud NAT lets you have a small number of NAT IP addresses
for each region that are used for outbound communications.
Cloud NAT also allows your VM instances to communicate across
the internet without having their own external IP addresses. Google Cloud firewall
rules are stateful. This means that if a connection is allowed between a source
and a target or a target and a destination, then all subsequent traffic in either
direction will be allowed as long as the connection is active. In other words,
firewall rules allow bidirectional communication after a session is established.
Reuse IP addresses across VPCs with Cloud NAT
IP addresses can be reused across VPCs when Cloud NAT for
NCC is enabled. Inter-VPC Cloud NAT is available when
VPCs are connected using NCC VPC spokes. If the VPC IP addresses overlap with ranges in external networks, enable
Hybrid NAT
. Only connections initiated
from workloads in Google Cloud towards external networks are translated.
Use private DNS zones for name resolution
Use
private zones on Cloud DNS
to allow your services to be resolved with DNS within your VPC network using their
internal IP addresses without exposing this mapping to the outside.
Use
split horizon DNS
to map services to different IP addresses from within the VPC network than
from the outside. For example, you can have a service exposed through network
load balancing from the public internet, but have internal load balancing
provide the same service using the same DNS name from within the VPC network.
API access for Google managed services
Best practices
:
Use the default internet gateway where possible
.
Add explicit routes for Google APIs if you need to modify the default route
.
Deploy instances that use Google APIs on the same subnet
.
Use the default internet gateway where possible
Access from resources within the VPC network to Google APIs follows the default
internet gateway next-hop. Despite the next-hop gateway's name, the traffic path
from instances to the Google APIs remains within Google's network.
By default, only VM instances with an external IP address can communicate with
Google APIs and services. If you need access from instances without an external
IP address, set up Private Service Connect endpoints or use the
Private Google Access feature for each subnet. This
doesn't slow down communications for Google APIs.
Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) automatically enables
Private Google Access on subnets where nodes are deployed. All nodes on
these subnets without an external IP address are able to access Google managed
services.
Add explicit routes for Google APIs if you need to modify the default route
If you need to modify the default route, then add explicit routes for Google
API destination IP ranges.
In environments where the default route (
0.0.0.0/0
) doesn't use the default
internet gateway next-hop, configure explicit routes for the
destination IP address ranges
used by Google APIs. Set the next-hop of the explicit routes to the default
internet gateway. An example of such a scenario is when you need to inspect all
traffic through an on-premises device.
Deploy instances that use Google APIs on the same subnet
Deploy instances that require access to Google APIs and services on the same
subnet and enable Private Google Access for instances without external
IP addresses. Alternatively, set up Private Service Connect endpoints.
If you are accessing Google APIs from your on-premises environment using
Private Google Access, use
Configuring Private Google Access for on-premises hosts
to access some Google services over private IP address ranges. Check to see
which
services are supported
before activating this feature, because access to other Google APIs through
the IP addresses provided by this service will be unreachable. Activating this
feature can require additional DNS configuration, such as configuring DNS
Views.
If you are accessing Google APIs from your on-premises environment using
Private Service Connect endpoints, see
Access the endpoint from
on-premises hosts
for details.
Logging, monitoring, and visibility
Best practices
:
Tailor logging for specific use cases and intended audiences
.
Increase the log aggregation interval for VPC networks with long connections
.
Use VPC Flow Logs sampling to reduce volume
.
Remove additional metadata when you only need IP and port data
.
Use Network Intelligence Center to get insights into your networks
Tailor logging for specific use cases and intended audiences
Use
VPC Flow Logs
for network monitoring, forensics, real-time security analysis, and expense
optimization. You can enable or disable VPC Flow Logs at the subnet level.
If VPC Flow Logs are enabled for a subnet, it collects data from all VM
instances in that subnet.
These logs record a sample of network flows that VM instances send and receive.
Your logging use cases help to determine which subnets you decide
require logging, and for how long.
Flow logs are aggregated by connection at 5-second intervals from
Compute Engine VMs and then exported in real time. You can view flow logs in
Cloud Logging and export them to any destination that Cloud Logging export
supports.
The logs ingestion page in Logging tracks the volume of logs in
your project and lets you disable all logs ingestion or exclude (discard) log
entries you're not interested in, so that you can minimize any charges for logs
over your monthly allotment.
Logs are a critical part of both operational and security success, but they
aren't useful unless you review them and take action. Tailor logs for their
intended audience, which helps to ensure operational and security success for
your VPC networks.
For details, see
Using VPC Flow Logs
.
Increase log aggregation interval for VPC networks with long connections
For VPC networks with mostly long-lived connections, set the log aggregation interval
to 15 minutes to greatly reduce the number of logs generated and to enable
quicker and simpler analysis.
An example workflow for which increasing the log aggregation interval is
appropriate is network monitoring, which involves the following tasks:
Performing network diagnosis
Filtering the flow logs by VMs and by applications to understand traffic
changes
Analyzing traffic growth to forecast capacity
Use VPC Flow Logs sampling to reduce volume
Use VPC Flow Logs sampling to reduce the volume of VPC Flow Logs, but still be
able to see low-level samples and aggregated views.
An example workflow for which using sampling to reduce volume is appropriate is
understanding network usage and optimizing network traffic expense. This workflow
involves the following tasks:
Estimating traffic between regions and zones
Estimating traffic to specific countries on the internet
Identifying top talkers
Remove additional metadata when you only need IP and port data
In security use cases where you are only interested in IP addresses and ports,
remove the additional metadata to reduce the volume of data consumed in
Cloud Logging.
An example workflow for which removing metadata is appropriate is network
forensics, which involves the following tasks:
Determining which IPs talked with whom and when
Identifying any compromised IP addresses, found by analyzing network flows
Use Network Intelligence Center to get insights into your networks
Network Intelligence Center
provides a single
console for managing Google Cloud network visibility, monitoring, and
troubleshooting. The following sections provide details about the Network Intelligence Center
components.
Network Topology
Use
Network Topology
to visualize your network topology.
Connectivity Tests
Use
Connectivity Tests
to help diagnose connectivity issues with your VPC networks.
Performance Dashboard
Use
Performance Dashboard
to check on the performance of the physical networking underlying your
VPC virtual networks.
Firewall Insights
Use
Firewall Insights
to gain understandings about your firewall rules and how they interact.
Network Analyzer
Use
Network Analyzer
to monitor your VPC network configurations and to detect
misconfigurations and suboptimal configurations.
Flow Analyzer
Use
Flow Analyzer
to gain a better understanding of VPC traffic flows.
Reference architectures
This section highlights a few architectures that illustrate some of the best
practices in this document.
Single project, single VPC network
This initial reference architecture includes all of the components necessary to
deploy highly available architectures across multiple regions, with subnet-level
isolation and a 99.99% SLA connecting to your on-premises data centers.
Single host project, multiple service projects, single Shared VPC
Building on the initial reference architecture, Shared VPC host projects and
multiple service projects let administrators delegate administrative
responsibilities—such as creating and managing instances—to Service Project
Admins while maintaining centralized control over network resources like
subnets, routes, and firewalls.
Multiple host projects, multiple service projects, multiple Shared VPC
The following diagram illustrates an architecture for VPC isolation, which
builds on our high-availability design while separating prod from other
projects. There are many reasons to consider VPC isolation, including audit requirements (such as
PCI), quota considerations between environments, or just another layer of
logical isolation. You only require two interconnects (for redundancy)
per location but can add multiple Interconnect attachments to multiple VPC networks or
regions from those.
Using isolation can also introduce the need for replication, as you decide where to
place core services such as proxies, authentication, and directory services.
Using a Shared Services VPC network can help to avoid this replication, and allow
you to share these services with other VPC networks through NCC, while at the
same time centralizing administration and deployment.
Stateful L7 firewall between VPC networks
This
architecture has multiple VPC networks that are bridged by an L7 next-generation firewall (NGFW) appliance, which
functions as a multi-NIC bridge between VPC networks.
An untrusted, outside VPC network is introduced to terminate
hybrid interconnects and internet-based connections that terminate on the
outside leg of the L7 NGFW for inspection. There are many variations on this
design, but the key principle is to filter traffic through the firewall before
the traffic reaches trusted VPC networks.
This design requires each VPC network to reside in the project where you insert the
VM-based NGFW. Because quotas are enforced at the project level, you must
consider the aggregate of all VPC resources.
Multiple VPC networks interconnected with NCC
This architecture has multiple VPC networks that connect to each other using
NCC. A transit VPC network is introduced to terminate hybrid
interconnects and share the hybrid connectivity across all other
VPCs, which avoids the need to create VLAN attachments for each
VPC network. This approach consolidates the
external connectivity and its associated routing considerations. Similarly, one
or more shared services VPC networks can be introduced to host common services
such as proxies, authentication, and directory services. There are many
variations on this design, but the key principle is to handle the different
services and connection types as spokes to a NCC hub that
provides any-to-any connectivity amongst these. This reference architecture is
described in detail in
Cross-Cloud Network inter-VPC connectivity using Network Connectivity Center
.
What's next
Cross-Cloud Network for distributed applications
VPC deep dive and best practices (Cloud NEXT'18 video)
Hybrid and multi-cloud network topologies
Decide a resource hierarchy for your Google Cloud landing zone
Best practices for Compute Engine region selection
Google Cloud for data center professionals: networking
VPC documentation
GKE networking overview
Explore reference architectures, diagrams, and best practices about Google Cloud.
Take a look at our
Cloud Architecture Center
.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-01-30 UTC.