Hybrid and multicloud architecture patterns  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Hybrid and multicloud architecture patterns
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-10-24 UTC
This document is the second of three documents in a set. It discusses common hybrid and
multicloud architecture patterns. It also describes the scenarios that these
patterns are best suited for. Finally, it provides the best practices you can
use when deploying such architectures in Google Cloud.
The document set for hybrid and multicloud architecture patterns consists of
these parts:
Build hybrid and multicloud architectures
:
discusses planning a strategy for architecting a hybrid and multicloud
setup with Google Cloud.
Hybrid and multicloud architecture patterns: discusses common architecture
patterns to adopt as part of a hybrid and multicloud strategy (this document).
Hybrid and multicloud secure networking architecture patterns
:
discusses hybrid and multicloud networking architecture patterns from a
networking perspective.
Every enterprise has a unique portfolio of application workloads that place
requirements and constraints on the architecture of a hybrid or multicloud
setup. Although you must design and tailor your architecture to meet these
constraints and requirements, you can rely on some common patterns to define the foundational architecture.
An architecture pattern is a repeatable way to structure multiple functional
components of a technology solution, application, or service to create a
reusable solution that addresses certain requirements or use cases. A
cloud-based technology solution is often made of several distinct and
distributed cloud services. These services collaborate to deliver required
functionality. In this context, each service is considered a functional
component of the technology solution. Similarly, an application can consist of
multiple functional tiers, modules, or services, and each can represent a
functional component of the application architecture. Such an architecture can
be standardized to address specific business use cases and serve as a
foundational, reusable pattern.
To generally define an architecture pattern for an application or solution,
identify and define the following:
The components of the solution or application.
The expected functions for each component—for example, frontend
functions to provide a graphical user interface or backend functions to
provide data access.
How the components communicate with each other and with external systems
or users. In modern applications, these components interact through
well-defined interfaces or APIs. There are a wide range of communication
models such as asynchronous and synchronous, request-response, or
queue-based.
The following are the two main categories of hybrid and multicloud architecture
patterns:
Distributed architecture patterns
:
These patterns rely on a distributed deployment of workloads or application
components. That means they run an application (or specific components of
that application) in the computing environment that suits the pattern best.
Doing so lets the pattern capitalize on the different properties and
characteristics of distributed and interconnected computing environments.
Redundant architecture patterns:
These patterns are based on redundant deployments of workloads. In these
patterns, you deploy the same applications and their components in multiple
computing environments. The goal is to either increase the performance
capacity or resiliency of an application, or to replicate an existing
environment for development and testing.
When you implement the architecture pattern that you select, you must use a
suitable
deployment archetype
.
Deployment archetypes are zonal, regional, multi-regional, or global. This
selection forms the basis for constructing application-specific deployment
architectures. Each deployment archetype defines a combination of failure
domains within which an application can operate. These failure domains can
encompass one or more
Google Cloud zones or regions
,
and can be expanded to include your on-premises data centers or failure domains
in other cloud providers.
This series contains the following pages:
Distributed architecture patterns
Tiered hybrid pattern
Partitioned multicloud pattern
Analytics hybrid and multicloud pattern
Edge hybrid pattern
Redundant architecture patterns
Environment hybrid pattern
Business continuity hybrid and multicloud patterns
Cloud bursting pattern
Contributors
Author:
Marwan Al Shawi
| Partner Customer Engineer
Other contributors:
Saud Albazei
| Customer Engineer, Application Modernization
Anna Berenberg
| Engineering Fellow
Marco Ferrari
| Cloud Solutions Architect
Victor Moreno
| Product Manager, Cloud Networking
Johannes Passing
| Cloud Solutions Architect
Mark Schlagenhauf
| Technical Writer, Networking
Daniel Strebel
| EMEA Solution Lead, Application Modernization
Ammett Williams
| Developer Relations Engineer
Next
Distributed architecture patterns
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-10-24 UTC.