Overview of identity and access management  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Overview of identity and access management
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-07-11 UTC
Identity and access management (generally referred to as
IAM
) is the practice
of granting the right individuals access to the right resources for the right
reasons. This series explores the general practice of IAM and the individuals
who are subject to it, including the following:
Corporate identities:
The identities that you manage for employees
of your organization. These identities are used for signing in to
workstations, accessing email, or using corporate applications. Corporate
identities might also include non-employees such as contractors or partners
that need access to corporate resources.
Customer identities:
The identities that you manage for users in
order to interact with your website or customer-facing applications.
Service identities:
The identities that you manage in order to
enable applications to interact with other applications or the underlying
platform.
You might need to grant access to the following resources:
Google services such as Google Cloud, Google Analytics, or
Google Workspace
Resources in Google Cloud, such as projects, Cloud Storage
buckets, or virtual machines (VMs)
Custom applications or resources managed by such applications
The guides in this series break down the discussion of IAM into the following
parts:
Managing corporate, customer, and service identities forms the
foundation of IAM. These topics are boxes 4, 5, and 6 (in green).
Relying on identity management as the foundation, boxes 2 and 3 (in blue)
denote access management topics. These topics include managing access
to Google services, to Google Cloud resources, and to your custom
workloads and applications.
Box 1 (in yellow) indicates access management topics that
are beyond the scope of these guides. To learn about access management for
Google Workspace
,
Google Marketing Platform
,
and other services, see the individual product documentation.
Identity management
Identity management focuses on the following processes:
Provisioning, managing, migrating, and deprovisioning identities,
users, and groups.
Enabling secure authentication to Google services and to your custom
workloads.
The processes and technologies differ depending on whether you are dealing with
corporate identities, application identities, or customer identities.
Manage corporate identities
Corporate identities are the identities that you manage for your organization's
employees. Employees use these identities for signing in to workstations,
accessing email, or using corporate applications.
In the context of managing corporate identities, the following are typical
requirements:
Maintaining a single place to manage identities across your organization.
Enabling employees to use a single identity and single sign-on across
multiple applications in a hybrid computing environment.
Enforcing policies such as multi-factor authentication or password
complexity for all employees.
Meeting compliance criteria that might apply to your business.
Google Workspace
and
Cloud Identity
are Google's products that let you address these requirements and centrally
manage identities and policies.
If you use Google services in
a hybrid or multi-cloud context
,
addressing these requirements might require that you integrate Google's IAM
capabilities with external identity management solutions or identity providers
such as Active Directory. The
Reference architectures
document explains how Google Workspace or Cloud Identity let you
realize such an integration.
Some of your employees might rely on Gmail accounts or other consumer user
accounts to access corporate resources. Using these types of user accounts might
not comply with your individual requirements or policies, however, so you can
migrate these users to Google Workspace or Cloud Identity. For
more details, see
Assessing your existing user accounts
and
Assessing onboarding plans
.
To help you adopt Google Workspace or Cloud Identity, see our
assessment and planning
guides for guidance on how to access your requirements and how to approach the
adoption process.
Manage application identities
Application identities are the identities that you manage in order to let
applications interact with other applications or with the underlying platform.
In the context of managing application identities, the following are typical
requirements:
Integrating with third-party APIs and authentication solutions.
Enabling authentication across environments in a hybrid or multi-cloud
scenario.
Preventing leakage of credentials.
Google Cloud lets you manage application identities, and address these
requirements, by using
Google Cloud service accounts
and
Kubernetes service accounts
.
For more information about service accounts and best practices for using them,
see the
Understanding service accounts
.
Manage customer identities
Customer identities are the identities that you manage for users to let them
interact with your website or customer-facing applications. Managing customer
identities and their access is also referred to as
customer identity and access
management (CIAM)
.
In the context of managing customer identities, the following are typical
requirements:
Letting customers sign up for a new account but guarding against abuse,
which might include detecting and blocking the creation of bot accounts.
Supporting
social sign-on
and integrating with third-party identity providers.
Supporting multi-factor authentication and enforcing password complexity
requirements.
Google's
Identity Platform
lets you manage customer identities and address these requirements. For more
details on the feature set and how to integrate Identity Platform with your custom
applications, see the
Identity Platform documentation
.
Access management
Access management focuses on the following processes:
Granting or revoking access to specific resources for identities.
Managing roles and permissions.
Delegating administrative capabilities to trusted individuals.
Enforcing access control.
Auditing accesses that are performed by identities.
Manage access to Google services
Your organization might rely on a combination of Google services. For example,
you might use Google Workspace for collaboration, Google Cloud for
deploying custom workloads, and Google Analytics for measuring
advertising success metrics.
Google Workspace or Cloud Identity lets you centrally control
which corporate identities can use which Google services. By restricting access
to certain services, you establish a base level of access control. You can then
use the access management capabilities of the individual services to configure
finer-grained access control.
For more details, read about how to
control who can access Google Workspace and Google services
.
Manage access to Google Cloud
In Google Cloud, you can use
IAM
to grant corporate identities granular access to specific resources. By using
IAM, you can implement the security principle of
least
privilege
, where you grant these identities permissions to access only the
resources that you specify.
For more information, see the
IAM documentation
.
Manage access to your workloads and applications
Your custom workloads and applications might differ based on the audience they
are intended for:
Some workloads might cater to corporate users—for example, internal
line-of-business applications, dashboards, or content management systems.
Other applications might cater to your customers—for example, your
website, a customer self-service portal, or backends for mobile applications.
The right way to manage access, enforce access control, and audit access
depends on the audience and the way you deploy the application.
To learn more about how to protect applications and other workloads that cater
to corporate users, see the
IAP documentation
.
You can also
directly integrate Sign-In With Google
or use standard protocols such as
OAuth 2.0
or
OpenID Connect
.
You can find out how to enforce access to APIs in
Istio
and
Cloud Endpoints
documentation. You can use both products whether your applications cater to
corporate users or to end users.
What's next
Understand the concepts and capabilities of identity management by
reading the
Concepts
section.
Learn about prescriptive guidance to consider in your architecture or
design by reading the
Best practices
section.
Learn how to assess your requirements and identify a suitable design by
reading the
Assess and plan
section.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-07-11 UTC.