IAM overview  |  Identity and Access Management (IAM)  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
IAM overview
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
This page describes how Google Cloud's Identity and Access Management (IAM)
system works and how you can use it to manage access in Google Cloud.
IAM is a tool to manage fine-grained authorization for
Google Cloud. In other words, it lets you control
who
can do
what
on
which resources
.
Access in Google Cloud
Every action in Google Cloud requires certain permissions. When someone
tries to perform an action in Google Cloud—for example, create a VM
instance or view a dataset—IAM first checks if they
have the required permissions. If they don't, then IAM prevents
them from performing the action.
Giving someone permissions in IAM involves the following three
components:
Principal
: The identity of the person or system that you want to give
permissions to.
Role
: The collection of permissions that you want to give the principal.
Resource
: The Google Cloud resource that you want to let the
principal access.
To give the principal permission to access the resource, you grant them a role
on the resource. You grant these roles using an
allow policy
.
Allow policies are directly attached to some Google Cloud resources, which
are organized
hierarchically
—for example, projects
contain service-specific resources. This means that you can grant access to a
single resource or a container of resources.
The following sections describe these concepts in more detail.
Principals
In Google Cloud you control access for
principals
. Principals represent
one or more identities that have authenticated to Google Cloud.
In the past, principals were referred to as
members
. Some APIs still use that
term.
There are various types of principals in IAM, but they can
be divided into two broad categories:
Human users
: Some IAM principal types represent human
users. You use these principal types for managing your employees' access to
Google Cloud resources.
Principal types that represent human users include Google Accounts, Google
groups, and federated identities in workforce identity pools.
Workloads
: Some IAM principal types represent workloads.
You use these principal types when managing your workloads' access
to Google Cloud resources.
Principal types that represent workloads include service
accounts and federated identities in a workload identity pool.
For more information about principals, see
IAM
principals
.
Permissions and roles
Permissions determine what operations are allowed on a resource. In
IAM, permissions are typically represented in the form
service
.
resource
.
verb
. Often,
permissions correspond one-to-one with REST API methods—for example, the
resourcemanager.projects.list
permission lets you list
Resource Manager projects.
You can't directly grant permissions to a principal
. Instead, you give
principals permissions by granting them
roles
.
Roles are collections of permissions. When you grant a role to a principal, you
give that principal all of the permissions in that role.
There are three types of roles:
Predefined roles
: Roles that are managed by Google Cloud services.
These roles contain the permissions needed to perform common tasks for each
given service. For example, the Pub/Sub Publisher role
(
roles/pubsub.publisher
) provides access to publish messages to a
Pub/Sub topic.
Custom roles
: Roles that you create that contain only the permissions that
you specify. You have complete control over the permissions in these roles.
However, they have a higher maintenance burden than predefined roles and
there's a limit to the number of custom roles that you can have in your
project and in your organization.
Basic roles
: Highly permissive roles that provide broad access to
Google Cloud services. These roles can be useful for testing purposes,
but shouldn't be used in production environments.
For more information about roles and permissions, see
Roles and
permissions
.
Resources
Most Google Cloud services have their own resources. For example,
Compute Engine has resources like instances, disks, and subnetworks.
In IAM, you grant roles on a resource. Granting a principal a
role on a resource means that the principal can use the permissions in that role
to access the resource.
You can grant roles on a subset of Google Cloud resources. For a full list
of resources that you can grant roles on, see
Resource types that accept allow
policies
.
Google Cloud also has container resources, including projects, folders,
and organizations. These container resources are organized hierarchically, which
lets child resources inherit the policies of their parent resources. This means
that granting a principal a role on a container resource gives the principal
access to both the container resource
and
the resources in that container.
This feature lets you use a single role grant to manage access to multiple
resources, including resources that you can't grant roles on directly. For more
information, see
Policy inheritance
on this page.
Allow policies
You grant roles to principals using
allow policies
. In the past, these
policies were referred to as
IAM policies
.
An allow policy is a YAML or JSON object that's attached to a Google Cloud
resource.
The following diagram shows how an allow policy is structured:
Each allow policy contains a list of
role bindings
that associate
IAM roles with the principals who are granted those roles.
When an authenticated principal attempts to access a resource,
IAM checks the resource's allow policy to determine whether
the principal has the required permissions. If the principal is in a role
binding that includes a role with the required permissions, then they're allowed
to access the resource.
To see examples of allow policies and learn about their structure, see
Understanding allow policies
.
Policy inheritance
Google Cloud has container resources—such as projects, folders, and
organizations—that let you organize your resources in a parent-child
hierarchy. This hierarchy is called the
resource hierarchy
.
The Google Cloud resource hierarchy has the following structure:
The
organization
is the root node in the hierarchy.
Folders
are children of the organization, or of another folder.
Projects
are children of the organization, or of a folder.
Resources
for each service are descendants of projects.
The following diagram is an example of a Google Cloud resource hierarchy:
If you set an allow policy on a container resource, then the allow policy also
applies to all resources in that container. This concept is called
policy
inheritance
, because descendant resources effectively inherit their ancestor
resources' allow policies.
Policy inheritance has the following implications:
You can use a single role binding to grant access to multiple resources.
If you want to give a principal access to all resources in a container, then
grant them a role on the container instead of on the resources in the
container.
For example, if you want to let your security administrator manage allow
policies for all resources in your organization, then you could grant them
the Security Admin role (
roles/iam.securityAdmin
) on the organization.
You can grant access to resources that don't have their own allow
policies.
Not all resources accept allow policies, but all resources inherit
allow policies from their ancestors. To give a principal access to a resource
that can't have its own allow policy, grant them a role on one of the
resource's ancestors.
For example, imagine you want to give someone permission to write logs to a
log bucket. Log buckets don't have their own allow policies, so to give
someone this permission, you can instead grant them the Logs Bucket Writer
role (
roles/logging.bucketWriter
) on the project that contains the log
bucket.
To understand who can access a resource, you need to also view
all
of the
allow policies that affect the resource
. To get a complete list of the
principals that have access to the resource, you need to view the resource's
allow policy
and
the resource's ancestors' allow policies. The union of all
of these policies is called the
effective allow policy
.
For more information about policy inheritance for allow policies, see
Using resource hierarchy for access control
.
Advanced access control
In addition to allow policies, IAM provides the following access
control mechanisms to help you refine who has access to what resources:
Additional policy types
: IAM offers the following policy
types in addition to allow policies:
Deny policies
: Deny policies prevent principals from using certain
permissions, even if they're granted a role with the permission.
Principal access boundary (PAB) policies
: Principal access boundary
policies define and enforce the resources a principal is eligible to
access. Principals can't access resources that they're not eligible to
access, even if they've been granted a role on the resource.
To learn more about these policies, see
Policy types
.
IAM Conditions
: IAM Conditions lets you
define and enforce conditional, attribute-based access control. You can use
conditions in various policy types. For example, you can add a condition to a
role binding in an allow policy to ensure that the role is only granted if the
condition is met.
You can write conditions based on attributes like the resource in the request
and the time of the request.
To learn more about IAM Conditions, see
Overview of
IAM Conditions
.
Privileged Access Manager (PAM)
: With Privileged Access Manager, you can
let principals request and be given temporary, auditable access to resources.
For example, you could require that principals request access each time they
want to view a sensitive resource instead of permanently granting them a
IAM role.
You can also configure whether principals are required to provide
justifications or get approvals when they request access.
To learn more about Privileged Access Manager, see
Privileged Access Manager
overview
.
Consistency model for the IAM API
The
IAM API
is
eventually consistent
. In other words, if you write data
with the IAM API, then immediately read that data, the read
operation might return an older version of the data. The changes that you make
might also take time to affect access checks.
This consistency model affects how the IAM API works. For
example, if you create a service account, then immediately refer to that service
account in another request, the IAM API might say that the
service account couldn't be found. This behavior occurs because operations are
eventually consistent; it can take time for the new service account to become
visible to read requests.
What's next
To learn how to configure identities for Google Cloud, see
Identity
management for Google Cloud
.
To learn how to grant, change, and revoke IAM
roles to principals, see
Manage access to projects, folders, and organizations
.
To see available IAM roles, see
Predefined roles
.
To get help with choosing the most appropriate predefined roles, read
Find the right predefined roles
.
To see the policy types available in IAM,
see
Policy types
.
Try it for yourself
If you're new to Google Cloud, create an account to evaluate how our
      products perform in real-world scenarios. New customers also get $300 in
      free credits to run, test, and deploy workloads.
Get started for free
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2026-04-02 UTC.