General best practices  |  Cloud SQL for MySQL  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
General best practices
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
MySQL
|
PostgreSQL
|
SQL Server
This page provides best practices for getting the best performance,
durability, and availability from Cloud SQL.
If issues occur with your Cloud SQL instance, review
the following during troubleshooting:
Debugging connection issues
Diagnosing issues
Known issues
Troubleshooting
Instance configuration and administration
Best practice
More information
Read and follow the
operational guidelines
to ensure that your instances are covered by the
Cloud SQL SLA
.
Configure a maintenance window for your primary instance to control
      when disruptive updates can occur.
See
Maintenance window
.
For read-heavy workloads, add
read replicas
to offload traffic from the primary instance.
Optionally, you can use a load balancer such as
HAProxy
to manage traffic to the
      replicas.
If you delete and recreate instances regularly, use a timestamp in
      the instance ID to increase the likelihood that new instance IDs are
      usable.
Don't start an administrative operation before the previous operation
      has completed.
Cloud SQL instances won't accept new operation requests until
      they have completed the previous operation. If you attempt to start
      a new operation prematurely, the operation request fails. This includes
      instance restarts.
The instance status in the Google Cloud console does not
        reflect whether an operation is running. The green check mark denotes
        only that the instance is in the
RUNNABLE
state. To see
        whether an operation is running, go to the
Operations
tab and
        check the status of the most recent operation.
Configure storage to accommodate critical database maintenance.
If the
enable automatic storage increases
instance setting is disabled or the
automatic storage increase limit
is enabled, ensure you have at least 20% available
      space to accommodate any critical database maintenance operations
      that Cloud SQL may perform.
To get alerted on available disk space falling below 20%, create a metrics-based alerting policy for the
disk utilization
metric with an
above threshold
position and a value of
.8
. For more information,
      see
Create metrics-based alert policies
.
Prevent over-utilization of your CPU.
You can view the percentage of available CPU that your instance is using
      on the instance details page in the Google Cloud console. For more information,
      see
Metrics
. You can also
      monitor your CPU usage and receive alerts at a specified threshold using
Create metric-threshold alerting policies
.
To avoid over-utilization, you can increase the number of CPUs for
      your instance. Changing CPUs requires an instance restart. If your instance
      is already at the maximum number of CPUs, you must shard your database to multiple
      instances.
Avoid memory exhaustion.
When looking for signs of memory exhaustion, you should primarily
      use the
usage
metric.
      
      To avoid out-of-memory errors, we recommend that this metric remains under
      90% for instances less than or equal to 16 GB and 95% for instances
      greater than 16 GB.
You can also use the
total_usage
metric to observe the percentage of available memory that your Cloud SQL
      instance is using, including memory used by the database container and
      memory allocated by the operating system cache.
By observing the difference between the two metrics, you can
      identify how much memory is used by processes versus how much
      is used by the operating system cache. You can repurpose the memory in
      this cache.
To predict out-of-memory issues, check both metrics and
      interpret them together. If the metrics appear high, the instance
       might be low in memory. This can be because of a custom configuration,
       the instance being undersized for the workload, or a combination of
       these factors.
Scale your Cloud SQL instance to increase the size of its memory.
      Changing the instance's memory size requires an instance restart.
      If your instance is already at the maximum memory size,
      you must shard your database across multiple instances. To learn more about
      monitoring both metrics in the Google Cloud console,
      see
Metrics
.
Security
Best practice
More information
Prefer Private IP
Unless
Public IP
access is required, prefer using
Private IP
. This will
        help minimize unauthorized network connections to your database.
Avoid 0.0.0.0/0 in Authorized Networks
Avoid including 0.0.0.0/0 in
Authorized Networks
as this permits access from the global internet without restriction.
Avoid excessively large Authorized Networks
Avoid using small CIDR prefixes in
Authorized Networks
as this permits access from a potentially excessive number of hosts.
        We recommend a CIDR prefix no smaller than /16, and preferably greater
        than /19.
Enable password policies
Using
Instance password policies
,
   
        specify appropriate password policies for your database instance to avoid
        weak passwords being configured, set expiry time, and configure account
        locking on failed login attempts.
        This is especially important if you are configuring your instance for
        Public IP.
Data architecture
Best practice
More information
Split your large instances into smaller instances, where possible.
When possible, using many smaller Cloud SQL instances is
        better than one large instance. Managing a large, monolithic instance
        presents challenges not posed by a group of smaller instances.
Don't use too many databases or database tables.
Keep your database count to less than 500 databases. Keep your
       instance's table count to fewer than 50,000, or 500,000 if you
       meet the minimum hardware requirement of 32+ cores and 200G+ memory. Keep
       your table count for each database fewer than 50,000 tables.
       Too many databases or database tables can impact database upgrade time.
Make sure your tables have a primary or unique key.
Cloud SQL uses row-based replication, which works best on tables
      with primary or unique keys.
Application implementation
Best practice
More information
Use good connection management practices, such as connection pooling and
      exponential backoff.
Using these techniques improves your application's use of resources
      and helps you stay within Cloud SQL
connection limits
.
      For more information and code samples, see
Managing database connections
.
Test your application's response to maintenance updates, which can
      happen at any time during the maintenance window.
Try
self-service maintenance
to simulate a maintenance update. During maintenance, your instance
      becomes unavailable for a brief period, and existing connections
      are dropped. Testing maintenance rollouts gives you a better
      understanding of how your application handles scheduled maintenance and
      how quickly the system can recover.
Test your application's response to failovers, which can
      happen at any time.
You can manually initiate a failover using the Google Cloud console,
      the
gcloud CLI
, or the API. See
Initiating failover
.
Avoid large transactions.
Keep transactions small and short. If a large database update is needed,
      do it in several smaller transactions rather than one large transaction.
If you are using the Cloud SQL Auth Proxy, make sure you are using the most
      up-to-date version.
See
Keeping the
        Cloud SQL Auth Proxy up-to-date
.
Data import and export
Best practice
More information
Use serverless exports.
Serverless exports
offload the export operation to a temporary instance, allowing the primary
      instance to continue to serve queries and perform operations at its usual
      performance. When the data export is complete, the temporary instance is
      automatically deleted.
Speed up imports for small instance sizes.
For small instances, you can temporarily
increase the CPU and RAM
of an instance to improve performance when importing large datasets.
If you are exporting data for import into Cloud SQL, be sure to
      use the proper procedure.
See
Exporting data from an externally managed database server
.
When migrating data with an export and import, use the exact same SQL
      mode for the import as the export.
See
Use the same SQL Mode for import and export
.
Backup and recovery
Best practice
More information
Protect your data with the appropriate Cloud SQL functionality.
Backups, point-in-time recovery, and exports are ways to provide data redundancy and
      protection. They each protect against different scenarios and complement
      each other in a robust data protection strategy.
Backups are lightweight; they provide a way to
        restore the data on your instance to its state at the time you took
        the backup. However, backups have some limitations. If you delete the
        instance, the backups are also deleted. You can't back up a single
        database or table. And if the region where the instance is located
        is unavailable, you cannot restore the instance from that backup, even
        in an available region.
Point-in-time recovery helps you recover an instance to a specific point
       in time. For example, if an error causes a loss of data, you can recover
       a database to its state before the error occurred. A point-in-time
       recovery always creates a new instance; you cannot perform a
       point-in-time recovery to an existing instance.
Exports take longer to create, because an external file is created
        in Cloud Storage that can be used to recreate your data. Exports
        are unaffected if you delete the instance. In addition, you can export
        only a single database or even table, depending on the export format
        you choose.
Size instances to account for transaction (binary) log retention.
High write activity to the database can generate a large volume of
      transaction (binary) logs, which can consume significant disk space, and
      lead to disk growth for instances enabled to increase storage
      automatically. We recommend sizing instance storage to account for
      transaction log retention.
Protect your instance and backups from accidental deletion.
A Cloud SQL instance that you create in the Google Cloud console
    or via Terraform enables accidental deletion prevention by default.
Use the export feature in Cloud SQL to export your data for additional
    protection. Use Cloud Scheduler with the REST API to automate export
    management. For more advanced scenarios, Cloud Scheduler with
    Cloud Run functions for automation.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2026-04-02 UTC.