Best practices for Cloud Storage  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Best practices for Cloud Storage
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
This page contains an index of best practices for Cloud Storage. You can use
the information collected here as a quick reference of what to keep in mind when
building an application that uses Cloud Storage.
If you are just starting out with Cloud Storage, this page may not be
the best place to start, because it does not teach you the basics of how to use
Cloud Storage. If you are a new user, we suggest that you start with
Discover object storage with the Google Cloud console
or
Discover object storage with the Google Cloud CLI
.
For best practices for media workloads, see
Best practices for media workloads
.
Naming
See
Bucket naming
and
Object naming
for name requirements
and considerations.
Traffic
Perform a back-of-the-envelope estimation of the amount of traffic that will
be sent to Cloud Storage. Specifically, think about:
Operations per second.  How many operations per second do you expect, for
both buckets and objects, and for create, update, and delete operations.
Bandwidth. How much data will be sent, over what timeframe? Consider
using a tool like
Wolfram Alpha
to avoid mistakes in your calculations.
Cache control. Specifying the
Cache-Control
metadata
on publicly
accessible objects will benefit read latency on hot or frequently accessed
objects.
See
Viewing and Editing Metadata
for instructions for setting object
metadata, such as
Cache-Control
.
Design your application to minimize spikes in traffic. If there are clients of
your application doing updates, spread them out throughout the day.
When designing applications for high request rates, be aware of
rate limits
for certain operations. Know the
bandwidth limits
for
certain types of egress and follow the
Request Rate and Access Distribution Guidelines
. Be especially aware of
autoscaling and the need to gradually ramp up request rates for the best
performance.
When handling errors:
Make sure your application uses a
retry strategy
in order to
avoid problems due to large traffic bursts.
Retry using a new connection and possibly re-resolve the domain name. This
helps avoid "server stickiness", where a retry attempts to go through the
same path and hits the same unhealthy component that the initial request
hit.
If your application is latency sensitive, use hedged requests. Hedged requests
allow you to retry faster and cut down on tail latency. They do this while not
reducing your request deadline, which could cause requests to time out
prematurely. For more information, see
The Tail at Scale
.
Understand the performance level customers expect from your application. This
information helps you choose a storage option and region when creating new
buckets. For example, consider colocating your compute resources with your
Cloud Storage buckets for analytics applications.
Locations and data storage options
See the
Storage class
and
Bucket location
topics for guidance on how
to best store your data.
ACLs and access control
Cloud Storage requests refer to buckets and objects by their names. As a
result, even though ACLs prevent unauthorized third parties from operating on
buckets or objects, a third party can attempt requests with bucket or object
names and determine their existence by observing the error responses. It can
then be possible for information in bucket or object names to be leaked. If you
are concerned about the privacy of your bucket or object names, you should take
appropriate precautions, such as:
Choosing bucket and object names that are difficult to guess.
For
example, a bucket named
mybucket-gtbytul3
is random enough that
unauthorized third parties cannot feasibly guess it or enumerate other
bucket names from it.
Avoiding use of sensitive information as part of bucket or object
names.
For example, instead of naming your bucket
mysecretproject-prodbucket
, name it
somemeaninglesscodename-prod
. In
some applications, you may want to keep sensitive metadata in
custom Cloud Storage headers
such as
x-goog-meta
, rather than encoding
the metadata in object names.
Using groups is preferable to explicitly listing large numbers of users. Not
only does it scale better, it also provides a very efficient way to update
the access control for a large number of objects all at once. Lastly, it's
cheaper as you don't need to make a request per-object to change the ACLs.
Review and follow
access control best practices
.
The Cloud Storage access control system includes the ability to
specify that objects are publicly readable. Make sure you intend for any
objects you write with this permission to be public. Once "published", data on
the Internet can be copied to many places, so it's effectively impossible to
regain read control over an object written with this permission.
The Cloud Storage access control system includes the ability to
specify that buckets are publicly writable. While configuring a bucket this
way can be convenient for various purposes, we recommend against using this
permission - it can be abused for distributing illegal content, viruses, and
other malware, and the bucket owner is legally and financially responsible for
the content stored in their buckets.
If you need to make content available securely to users who don't have user
accounts, we recommend you use
signed URLs
. For example, with signed URLs
you can provide a link to an object, and your application's customers don't
need to authenticate with Cloud Storage to access the object. When you
create a signed URL you control the type (read, write, delete) and duration of
access.
Data uploads
If you use XMLHttpRequest (XHR) callbacks to get progress updates, do not
close and re-open the connection if you detect that progress has stalled.
Doing so creates a bad positive feedback loop during times of network
congestion. When the network is congested, XHR callbacks can get backlogged
behind the acknowledgement (ACK/NACK) activity from the upload stream, and
closing and reopening the connection when this happens uses more network
capacity at exactly the time when you can least afford it.
For upload traffic, we recommend setting reasonably long timeouts. For a good
end-user experience, you can set a client-side timer that updates the client
status window with a message (e.g., "network congestion") when your
application hasn't received an XHR callback for a long time. Don't just
close the connection and try again when this happens.
A convenient way to reduce the bandwidth needed for each request is
to enable gzip compression. Although this requires additional CPU time to
extract the results, the trade-off with network costs usually makes it
very worthwhile.
An object that was uploaded in gzip format can generally be served in gzip
format as well. However, avoid uploading content that has both
content-encoding: gzip
and a
content-type
that is compressed, as this
may lead to
unexpected behavior
.
We recommend using
resumable uploads
, which allow you to resume
transferring data even when a communication failure has interrupted the flow
of data. You can also use XML API multipart uploads to upload parts of a file
in parallel, which potentially reduces the time to complete the overall
upload.
Deletion of data
See
Delete objects
for guidelines and considerations on deleting data.
You can also use
features for controlling data lifecycles
to help protect
your data from getting erroneously deleted by your application software or
users.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2026-04-03 UTC.