Plan resource allocation  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Plan resource allocation
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-12-06 UTC
This principle in the performance optimization pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to help you plan resources for your workloads in
Google Cloud. It emphasizes the importance of defining granular
requirements before you design and develop applications for cloud deployment or
migration.
Principle overview
To meet your business requirements, it's important that you define the performance
requirements for your applications, before design and development. Define these
requirements as granularly as possible for the application as a whole and for
each layer of the application stack. For example, in the storage layer, you
must consider the throughput and I/O operations per second (IOPS) that the
applications need.
From the beginning, plan application designs with performance and scalability in
mind. Consider factors such as the number of users, data volume, and potential
growth over time.
Performance requirements for each workload vary and depend on the type of
workload. Each workload can contain a mix of component systems and services that
have unique sets of performance characteristics. For example, a system that's
responsible for periodic batch processing of large datasets has different
performance demands than an interactive virtual desktop solution.
Your optimization strategies must address the specific needs of each workload.
Select services and features that align with the performance goals of each
workload. For performance optimization, there's no one-size-fits-all solution. When you
optimize each workload, the entire system can achieve optimal performance and
efficiency.
Consider the following workload characteristics that can influence your
performance requirements:
Deployment archetype
: The
deployment archetype
that you select for an application can influence your choice of products and features,
which then determine the performance that you can expect from your application.
Resource placement
: When you select a Google Cloud
region
for your application resources, we recommend that you prioritize low latency for end
users, adhere to data-locality regulations, and ensure the availability of
required Google Cloud products and services.
Network connectivity
: Choose networking services that optimize data
access and content delivery. Take advantage of Google Cloud's global
network, high-speed backbones, interconnect locations, and caching services.
Application hosting options
: When you select a hosting platform, you
must evaluate the performance advantages and disadvantages of each option.
For example, consider bare metal, virtual machines, containers, and serverless
platforms.
Storage strategy
: Choose an
optimal storage strategy
that's based on your performance requirements.
Resource configurations
: The machine type, IOPS, and throughput can
have a significant impact on performance. Additionally, early in the design
phase, you must consider appropriate security capabilities and their impact on
resources. When you plan security features, be prepared to accommodate the
necessary performance trade-offs to avoid any unforeseen effects.
Recommendations
To ensure optimal resource allocation, consider the recommendations in the
following sections.
Configure and manage quotas
Ensure that your application uses only the necessary resources, such as memory,
storage, and processing power. Over-allocation can lead to unnecessary expenses,
while under-allocation might result in performance degradation.
To accommodate elastic scaling and to ensure that adequate resources are
available, regularly monitor the capacity of your quotas. Additionally, track
quota usage to identify potential scaling constraints or over-allocation issues,
and then make informed decisions about resource allocation.
Educate and promote awareness
Inform your users about the performance requirements and provide
educational resources
about effective performance management techniques.
To evaluate progress and to identify areas for improvement, regularly document the
target performance and the actual performance. Load test your application to find
potential breakpoints and to understand how you can scale the application.
Monitor performance metrics
Use
Cloud Monitoring
to analyze trends in performance metrics, to analyze the effects of experiments,
to define alerts for critical metrics, and to perform retrospective analyses.
Active Assist
is a set of tools that can provide insights and recommendations to help optimize
resource utilization. These recommendations can help you to adjust resource
allocation and improve performance.
Previous
arrow_back
Overview
Next
Take advantage of elasticity
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-12-06 UTC.