Implement shift-left security  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Implement shift-left security
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
helps you identify practical controls that you can implement early in the
software development lifecycle to improve your security posture. It provides
recommendations that help you implement preventive security guardrails and
post-deployment security controls.
Principle overview
Shift-left security
means adopting security practices early in the software
development lifecycle. This principle has the following goals:
Avoid security defects before system changes are made. Implement
preventive security guardrails and adopt practices such as infrastructure
as code (IaC), policy as code, and security checks in the CI/CD pipeline.
You can also use other platform-specific capabilities like
Organization Policy Service
and
hardened GKE clusters
in Google Cloud.
Detect and fix security bugs early, fast, and reliably after any system
changes are committed. Adopt practices like code reviews, post-deployment
vulnerability scanning, and security testing.
The
Implement security by design
and shift-left security principles are related but they differ in scope.
The security-by-design principle helps you to avoid fundamental design flaws that would
require re-architecting the entire system. For example, a threat-modeling
exercise reveals that the current design doesn't include an authorization
policy, and all users would have the same level of access without it. Shift-left
security helps you to avoid implementation defects (bugs and misconfigurations)
before changes are applied, and it enables fast, reliable fixes after deployment.
Recommendations
To implement the shift-left security principle for your cloud workloads,
consider the recommendations in the following sections:
Adopt preventive security controls
Automate provisioning and management of cloud resources
Automate secure application releases
Ensure that application deployments follow approved processes
Scan for known vulnerabilities before application deployment
Monitor your application code for known vulnerabilities
Adopt preventive security controls
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Identity and access management
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Preventive security controls are crucial for maintaining a strong security
posture in the cloud. These controls help you proactively mitigate risks. You
can prevent misconfigurations and unauthorized access to resources, enable
developers to work efficiently, and help ensure compliance with industry
standards and internal policies.
Preventive security controls are more effective when they're implemented by
using infrastructure as code (IaC). With IaC, preventive security controls can
include more customized checks on the infrastructure code before changes are
deployed. When combined with automation, preventive security controls can run as
part of your CI/CD pipeline's automatic checks.
The following products and Google Cloud capabilities can help you implement
preventive controls in your environment:
Organization Policy Service constraints
:
configure predefined and custom constraints with centralized control.
VPC Service Controls
:
create perimeters around your Google Cloud services.
Identity and Access Management (IAM),
Privileged Access Manager
,
and
principal access boundary policies
:
restrict access to resources.
Policy Controller
and
Open Policy Agent (OPA)
:
enforce IaC constraints in your CI/CD pipeline and avoid cloud
misconfigurations.
IAM lets you authorize
who
can act on specific resources based
on permissions. For more information, see
Access control for organization resources with IAM
.
Organization Policy Service lets you set restrictions on resources to specify how they can
be configured. For example, you can use an organization policy to do the
following:
Limit resource sharing
based on domain.
Limit the use of service accounts
.
Restrict the physical location
of newly created resources.
In addition to using organizational policies, you can restrict access to
resources by using the following methods:
Tags with IAM
:
assign a tag to a set of resources and then set the access definition for
the tag itself, rather than defining the access permissions on each resource.
IAM Conditions
:
define conditional, attribute-based access control for resources.
Defense in depth: use VPC Service Controls to further restrict
access to resources.
For more information about resource management, see
Decide a resource hierarchy for your Google Cloud landing zone
.
Automate provisioning and management of cloud resources
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Application security
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Automating the provisioning and management of cloud resources and workloads is
more effective when you also adopt declarative IaC, as opposed to imperative
scripting. IaC isn't a security tool or practice on its own, but it helps you
to improve the security of your platform. Adopting IaC lets you create
repeatable infrastructure and provides your operations team with a known good
state. IaC also improves the efficiency of rollbacks, audit changes, and
troubleshooting.
When combined with CI/CD pipelines and automation, IaC also gives you the
ability to adopt practices such as
policy as code
with tools like OPA. You can
audit infrastructure changes over time and run automatic checks on the
infrastructure code before changes are deployed.
To automate the infrastructure deployment, you can use tools like
Config Controller
,
Terraform, Jenkins, and
Cloud Build
.
To help you build a secure application environment using IaC and automation,
Google Cloud provides the
enterprise foundations blueprint
.
This blueprint is Google's opinionated design that follows all of our
recommended practices and configurations. The blueprint provides step-by-step
instructions to configure and deploy your Google Cloud topology by using
Terraform and Cloud Build.
You can modify the scripts of the
enterprise foundations blueprint to configure an environment that follows Google
recommendations and meets your own security requirements. You can further build
on the blueprint with additional blueprints or design your own automation. The
Google Cloud Architecture Center provides other blueprints that can be
implemented on top of the enterprise foundations blueprint. The following are a
few examples of these blueprints:
Deploy an enterprise developer platform on Google Cloud
Deploy a secured serverless architecture using Cloud Run
Build and deploy generative AI and machine learning models in an enterprise
Import data from Google Cloud into a secured BigQuery data warehouse
Automate secure application releases
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Application security.
Without automated tools, it can be difficult to deploy, update, and patch
complex application environments to meet consistent security requirements. We
recommend that you build automated CI/CD pipelines for your software development
lifecycle (SDLC). Automated CI/CD pipelines help you to remove manual errors,
provide standardized development feedback loops, and enable efficient product
iterations. Continuous delivery is one of the best practices that the
DORA framework
recommends.
Automating application releases by using CI/CD pipelines helps to improve your
ability to detect and fix security bugs early, fast, and reliably. For example,
you can scan for security vulnerabilities automatically when artifacts are
created, narrow the scope of security reviews, and roll back to a known and safe
version. You can also define policies for different environments (such as
development, test, or production environments) so that only verified artifacts
are deployed.
To help you automate application releases and embed security checks in your
CI/CD pipeline, Google Cloud provides multiple tools including
Cloud Build
,
Cloud Deploy
,
Web Security Scanner
,
and
Binary Authorization
.
To establish a process that verifies multiple security requirements in your SDLC,
use the
Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA)
framework, which has been defined by Google. SLSA requires security
checks for source code, build process, and code provenance. Many of these
requirements can be included in an automated CI/CD pipeline. To understand how
Google applies these practices internally, see
Google Cloud's approach to change
.
Ensure that application deployments follow approved processes
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Application security.
If an attacker compromises your CI/CD pipeline, your entire application stack
can be affected. To help secure the pipeline, you should enforce an established
approval process before you deploy the code into production.
If you use Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) or
Cloud Run, you can establish an approval process by using
Binary Authorization
.
Binary Authorization attaches configurable signatures to container images.
These signatures (also called
attestations
) help to validate the image. At
deployment time, Binary Authorization uses these attestations to determine
whether a process was completed. For example, you can use Binary Authorization
to do the following:
Verify that a specific build system or CI pipeline created a container
image.
Validate that a container image is compliant with a vulnerability
signing policy.
Verify that a container image passes the criteria for promotion to the
next deployment environment, such as from development to QA.
By using Binary Authorization, you can enforce that only trusted code runs on
your target platforms.
Scan for known vulnerabilities before application deployment
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Application security.
We recommend that you use automated tools that can continuously perform
vulnerability scans on application artifacts before they're deployed to
production.
For containerized applications, use
Artifact Analysis
to automatically run vulnerability scans for container images.
Artifact Analysis scans new images when they're uploaded to
Artifact Registry
.
The scan extracts information about the system packages in the container. After
the initial scan, Artifact Analysis continuously monitors the metadata
of scanned images in Artifact Registry for new vulnerabilities. When
Artifact Analysis receives new and updated vulnerability information
from
vulnerability sources
,
it does the following:
Updates the metadata of the scanned images to keep them up to date.
Creates new vulnerability occurrences for new notes.
Deletes vulnerability occurrences that are no longer valid.
Monitor your application code for known vulnerabilities
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Application security.
Use automated tools to constantly monitor your application code for known
vulnerabilities such as the
OWASP Top 10
.
For more information about Google Cloud products and features that support
OWASP Top 10 mitigation techniques, see
OWASP Top 10 mitigation options on Google Cloud
.
Use
Web Security Scanner
to help identify security vulnerabilities in your App Engine,
Compute Engine, and GKE web applications. The scanner
crawls your application, follows all of the links within the scope of your
starting URLs, and attempts to exercise as many user inputs and event handlers
as possible. It can automatically scan for and detect common vulnerabilities,
including
cross-site scripting
,
code injection
,
mixed content
,
and outdated or insecure libraries. Web Security Scanner provides early
identification of these types of vulnerabilities without distracting you with
false positives.
In addition, if you use GKE to manage fleets of
Kubernetes clusters, the security posture dashboard shows opinionated,
actionable recommendations to help improve your fleet's security posture.
Previous
arrow_back
Implement zero trust
Next
Implement preemptive cyber defense
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.