Implement security by design  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Implement security by design
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to incorporate robust security features, controls, and
practices into the design of your cloud applications, services, and platforms.
From ideation to operations, security is more effective when it's embedded as an
integral part of every stage of your design process.
Principle overview
As explained in
An Overview of Google's Commitment to Secure by Design
,
secure by default
and
secure by design
are often used interchangeably, but
they represent distinct approaches to building secure systems. Both approaches
aim to minimize vulnerabilities and enhance security, but they differ in scope
and implementation:
Secure by default
: focuses on ensuring that a system's default
settings are set to a secure mode, minimizing the need for users or
administrators to take actions to secure the system. This approach aims to
provide a baseline level of security for all users.
Secure by design
: emphasizes proactively incorporating security
considerations throughout a system's development lifecycle. This approach
is about anticipating potential threats and vulnerabilities early and
making design choices that mitigate risks. This approach involves using
secure coding practices, conducting security reviews, and embedding
security throughout the design process. The secure-by-design approach is an
overarching philosophy that guides the development process and helps to ensure
that security isn't an afterthought but is an integral part of a system's design.
Recommendations
To implement the secure by design principle for your cloud workloads, consider
the recommendations in the following sections:
Choose system components that help to secure your workloads
Build a layered security approach
Use hardened and attested infrastructure and services
Encrypt data at rest and in transit
Choose system components that help to secure your workloads
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
A fundamental decision for effective security is the selection of robust system
components—including both hardware and software components—that constitute
your platform, solution, or service. To reduce the security attack surface and
limit potential damage, you must also carefully consider the deployment patterns
of these components and their configurations.
In your application code, we recommend that you use straightforward, safe, and
reliable libraries, abstractions, and application frameworks in order to eliminate
classes of vulnerabilities. To scan for vulnerabilities in software libraries,
you can use third-party tools. You can also use
Assured Open Source Software
,
which helps to reduce risks to your software supply chain by using open source
software (OSS) packages that Google uses and secures.
Your infrastructure must use networking, storage, and compute options that
support safe operation and align with your security requirements and risk
acceptance levels. Infrastructure security is important for both internet-facing
and internal workloads.
For information about other Google solutions that support this recommendation,
see
Implement shift-left security
.
Build a layered security approach
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
AI and ML security
Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
We recommend that you implement security at each layer of your application and
infrastructure stack by applying a defense-in-depth approach.
Use the security features in each component of your platform. To limit access
and identify the boundaries of the potential impact (that is, the
blast radius
)
in the event of a security incident, do the following:
Simplify your system's design to accommodate flexibility where possible.
Document the security requirements of each component.
Incorporate a robust secured mechanism to address resiliency and recovery
requirements.
When you design the security layers, perform a risk assessment to determine the
security features that you need in order to meet internal security requirements
and external regulatory requirements. We recommend that you use an
industry-standard risk assessment framework that applies to cloud environments
and that is relevant to your regulatory requirements. For example, the Cloud
Security Alliance (CSA) provides the
Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM)
.
Your risk assessment provides you with a catalog of risks and corresponding
security controls to mitigate them.
When you perform the risk assessment, remember that you have a shared
responsibility arrangement with your cloud provider. Therefore, your risks in a
cloud environment differ from your risks in an on-premises environment. For
example, in an on-premises environment, you need to mitigate vulnerabilities to
your hardware stack. In contrast, in a cloud environment, the cloud provider
bears these risks. Also, remember that the boundaries of shared responsibilities
differ between IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS services for each cloud provider.
After you identify potential risks, you must design and create a mitigation
plan that uses technical, administrative, and operational controls, as well as
contractual protections and third-party attestations. In addition, a threat
modeling method, such as the
OWASP application threat modeling method
,
helps you to identify potential gaps and suggest actions to address the gaps.
Use hardened and attested infrastructure and services
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
A mature security program mitigates new vulnerabilities as described in
security bulletins. The security program should also provide remediation to fix
vulnerabilities in existing deployments and secure your VM and container
images. You can use hardening guides that are specific to the OS and application
of your images, as well as benchmarks like the one provided by the
Center of Internet Security (CIS)
.
If you use custom images for your Compute Engine VMs, you need to patch the
images yourself. Alternatively, you can use Google-provided
curated OS images
,
which are patched regularly. To run containers on Compute Engine VMs, use
Google-curated
Container-optimized OS images
.
Google regularly patches and updates these images.
If you use GKE, we recommend that you enable
node auto-upgrades
so that Google updates your cluster nodes with the latest patches. Google
manages GKE control planes, which are automatically updated
and patched. To further reduce the attack surface of your containers, you can
use
distroless images
.
Distroless images are ideal for security-sensitive applications, microservices,
and situations where minimizing the image size and attack surface is
paramount.
For sensitive workloads, use
Shielded VM
,
which prevents malicious code from being loaded during the VM boot cycle.
Shielded VM instances provide boot security, monitor integrity, and use
the
Virtual Trusted Platform Module (vTPM)
.
To help secure SSH access,
OS Login
lets your employees connect to your VMs by using
Identity and Access Management (IAM) permissions
as the source of truth instead of relying on SSH keys. Therefore, you don't need
to manage SSH keys throughout your organization. OS Login ties an
administrator's access to their employee lifecycle, so when employees change
roles or leave your organization, their access is revoked with their account. OS
Login also supports
Google two-factor authentication
,
which adds an extra layer of security against account takeover attacks.
In GKE, application instances run within Docker
containers. To enable a defined risk profile and to restrict employees from
making changes to containers, ensure that your containers are stateless and
immutable. The immutability principle means that your employees don't modify the
container or access it interactively. If the container must be changed, you
build a new image and redeploy that image. Enable SSH access to the underlying
containers only in specific debugging scenarios.
To help globally secure configurations across your environment, you can use
organization policies
to set constraints or guardrails on resources that affect the behavior of your
cloud assets. For example, you can define the following organization policies
and apply them either globally across a Google Cloud organization or
selectively at the level of a folder or project:
Disable external IP address allocation to VMs.
Restrict resource creation to specific geographical locations.
Disable the creation of Service Accounts or their keys.
Encrypt data at rest and in transit
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Infrastructure security
Data security
Data encryption is a foundational control to protect sensitive information, and
it's a key part of
data governance
.
An effective data protection strategy includes access control, data segmentation
and geographical residency, auditing,
and
encryption implementation that's
based on a careful assessment of requirements.
By default, Google Cloud
encrypts customer data that's stored at rest
,
with no action required from you. In addition to default encryption,
Google Cloud provides options for envelope encryption and encryption key
management. You must identify the solutions that best fit your requirements for
key generation, storage, and rotation, whether you're choosing the keys for your
storage, for compute, or for big data workloads. For example,
Customer-managed encryption keys (CMEKs)
can be created in
Cloud Key Management Service (Cloud KMS)
.
The CMEKs can be either software-based or
HSM-protected
to meet your regulatory or compliance requirements, such as the need to rotate
encryption keys regularly. Cloud KMS Autokey lets you automate the
provisioning and assignment of CMEKs. In addition, you can bring your own keys
that are sourced from a third-party key management system by using
Cloud External Key Manager (Cloud EKM)
.
We strongly recommend that data be encrypted in-transit.
Google encrypts and authenticates data in transit
at one or more network layers when data moves outside physical boundaries that
aren't controlled by Google or on behalf of Google. All VM-to-VM traffic within
a VPC network and between peered VPC networks is encrypted. You can use
MACsec
for encryption of traffic over Cloud Interconnect connections. IPsec provides
encryption for traffic over
Cloud VPN
connections. You can protect application-to-application traffic in the cloud by
using security features like
TLS and mTLS configurations in Apigee
and
Cloud Service Mesh
for containerized applications.
By default, Google Cloud encrypts data at rest and data in transit across
the network. However, data isn't encrypted by default while it's in use in
memory. If your organization handles confidential data, you need to mitigate any
threats that undermine the confidentiality and integrity of either the
application or the data in system memory. To mitigate these threats, you can use
Confidential Computing, which provides a trusted execution environment for your
compute workloads. For more information, see
Confidential VM overview
.
Previous
arrow_back
Overview
Next
Implement zero trust
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.