Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
helps you identify and meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy requirements for
cloud deployments. These requirements influence many of the decisions that you need
to make about the security controls that must be used for your workloads in
Google Cloud.
Principle overview
Meeting regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs is an unavoidable challenge
for all businesses. Cloud regulatory requirements depend on several factors,
including the following:
The laws and regulations that apply to your organization's physical locations
The laws and regulations that apply to your customers' physical locations
Your industry's regulatory requirements
Privacy regulations define how you can obtain, process, store, and manage your
users' data. You own your own data, including the data that you receive from your
users. Therefore, many privacy controls are your responsibility, including controls
for cookies, session management, and obtaining user permission.
The recommendations to implement this principle are grouped within the following
sections:
Recommendations to address organizational risks
Recommendations to address regulatory and compliance obligations
Recommendations to manage your data sovereignty
Recommendations to address privacy requirements
Recommendations to address organizational risks
This section provides recommendations to help you identify and address risks to
your organization.
Identify risks to your organization
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Before you create and deploy resources on Google Cloud, complete a risk
assessment. This assessment should determine the security features that you need
to meet your internal security requirements and external regulatory
requirements.
Your risk assessment provides you with a catalog of organization-specific risks,
and informs you about your organization's capability to detect and counteract
security threats. You must perform a risk analysis immediately after deployment
and whenever there are changes in your business needs, regulatory requirements,
or threats to your organization.
As mentioned in the
Implement security by design
principle, your security risks in a cloud environment differ from on-premises
risks. This difference is due to the shared responsibility model in the cloud,
which varies by service (IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS) and your usage. Use a
cloud-specific risk assessment framework like the
Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM)
.
Use threat modeling, like
OWASP application threat modeling
,
to identify and address vulnerabilities. For expert help with risk assessments,
contact your Google account representative or consult Google Cloud's
partner directory
.
After you catalog your risks, you must determine how to address them—that is,
whether you want to accept, avoid, transfer, or mitigate the risks. For
mitigation controls that you can implement, see the next section about mitigating
your risks.
Mitigate your risks
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
When you adopt new public cloud services, you can mitigate risks by using
technical controls, contractual protections, and third-party verifications or
attestations.
Technical controls
are features and technologies that you use to protect your
environment. These include built-in cloud security controls like firewalls and
logging. Technical controls can also include using third-party tools to
reinforce or support your security strategy. There are two categories of
technical controls:
You can implement Google Cloud's security controls to help you
mitigate the risks that apply to your environment. For example, you can
secure the connection between your on-premises networks and your cloud
networks by using
Cloud VPN
and
Cloud Interconnect
.
Google has robust internal controls and auditing to protect against
insider access to customer data. Our audit logs provide you with near
real-time logs of
Google administrator access
on Google Cloud.
Contractual protections
refer to the legal commitments made by us regarding
Google Cloud services. Google is committed to maintaining and expanding
our compliance portfolio. The
Cloud Data Processing Addendum (CDPA)
describes our commitments with regard to the processing and security of your
data. The CDPA also outlines the access controls that limit Google support
engineers' access to customers' environments, and it describes our rigorous
logging and approval process. We recommend that you review Google Cloud's
contractual controls with your legal and regulatory experts, and verify that
they meet your requirements. If you need more information,
contact your technical account representative
.
Third-party verifications or attestations
refer to having a third-party
vendor audit the cloud provider to ensure that the provider meets compliance
requirements. For example, to learn about Google Cloud attestations with
regard to the ISO/IEC 27017 guidelines, see
ISO/IEC 27017 - Compliance
.
To view the current Google Cloud certifications and letters of
attestation, see
Compliance resource center
.
Recommendations to address regulatory and compliance obligations
A typical compliance journey has three stages: assessment, gap remediation, and
continual monitoring. This section provides recommendations that you can use
during each of these stages.
Assess your compliance needs
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Compliance assessment starts with a thorough review of all of your regulatory
obligations and how your business is implementing them. To help you with your
assessment of Google Cloud services, use the
Compliance resource center
.
This site provides information about the following:
Service support for various regulations
Google Cloud certifications and attestations
To better understand the compliance lifecycle at Google and how your
requirements can be met, you can
contact sales
to request help from a Google compliance specialist. Or, you can contact your
Google Cloud account manager to request a compliance workshop.
For more information about tools and resources that you can use to manage
security and compliance for Google Cloud workloads, see
Assuring Compliance in the Cloud
.
Automate implementation of compliance requirements
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
To help you stay in compliance with changing regulations, determine whether you
can automate how you implement compliance requirements. You can use both
compliance-focused capabilities that Google Cloud provides and blueprints
that use recommended configurations for a particular compliance regime.
Assured Workloads
builds on the controls within Google Cloud to help you meet your
compliance obligations. Assured Workloads lets you do the following:
Select your compliance regime. Then, the tool automatically sets the
baseline personnel access controls for the selected regime.
Set the location for your data by using organization policies so that
your data at rest and your resources remain only in that
region
.
Select the key-management option (such as the key rotation period) that
best meets your security and compliance requirements.
Select the access criteria for Google support personnel to meet certain
regulatory requirements such as FedRAMP Moderate. For example, you can
select whether Google support personnel have completed the appropriate
background checks.
Use Google-owned and Google-managed encryption keys that are FIPS-140-2
compliant and support FedRAMP Moderate compliance. For an added layer of
control and for the separation of duties, you can use customer-managed
encryption keys (CMEK). For more information about keys, see
Encrypt data at rest and in transit
.
In addition to Assured Workloads, you can use Google Cloud
blueprints that are relevant to your compliance regime. You can modify these
blueprints to incorporate your security policies into your infrastructure
deployments.
To help you build an environment that supports your compliance requirements,
Google's blueprints and solution guides include recommended configurations and
provide Terraform modules. The following table lists blueprints that address
security and alignment with compliance requirements.
Requirement
Blueprints and solution guides
FedRAMP
Google Cloud FedRAMP implementation
guide
Setting up a
FedRAMP Aligned Three-Tier Workload on Google Cloud
HIPAA
Protecting
healthcare data on Google Cloud
Setting up a
HIPAA-aligned workload using Data Protection Toolkit
Monitor your compliance
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Logging, monitoring, and auditing
Most regulations require that you monitor particular activities, which include
access-related activities. To help with your monitoring, you can use the
following:
Access Transparency
:
View near real-time logs when Google Cloud administrators access your
content.
Firewall Rules Logging
:
Record TCP and UDP connections inside a VPC network for any rules that you
create. These logs can be useful for auditing network access or for
providing early warning that the network is being used in an unapproved manner.
VPC Flow Logs
:
Record network traffic flows that are sent or received by VM instances.
Security Command Center Premium
:
Monitor for compliance with various standards.
OSSEC
(or another open source tool): Log the activity of individuals who have
administrator access to your environment.
Key Access Justifications
:
View the reasons for a key-access request.
Security Command Center notifications
:
Get alerts when noncompliance issues occur.
For example, get alerts when users disable two-step verification or when
service accounts are over-privileged.
You can also set up automatic remediation for specific notifications.
Recommendations to manage your data sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Data sovereignty provides you with a mechanism to prevent Google from accessing
your data. You approve access only for provider behaviors that you agree are
necessary. For example, you can manage your data sovereignty in the following
ways:
Store and manage
encryption keys
outside the cloud.
Grant access to these keys based on detailed
access justifications
.
Protect data in use
by using Confidential Computing.
Manage your operational sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Operational sovereignty provides you with assurances that Google personnel can't
compromise your workloads. For example, you can manage operational sovereignty
in the following ways:
Restrict the deployment
of new resources to specific provider regions.
Limit Google personnel access
based on predefined attributes such as their citizenship or geographic location.
Manage software sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Software sovereignty provides you with assurances that you can control the
availability of your workloads and run them wherever you want. Also, you can
have this control without being dependent or locked in with a single cloud
provider. Software sovereignty includes the ability to survive events that
require you to quickly change where your workloads are deployed and what level
of outside connection is allowed.
For example, to help you manage your software sovereignty, Google Cloud
supports
hybrid and multicloud deployments
.
If you choose on-premises deployments for data
sovereignty reasons,
Google Distributed Cloud
is a combination of hardware and software that brings Google Cloud into
your data center.
Recommendations to address privacy requirements
Google Cloud includes the following controls that promote privacy:
Default encryption of all data when it's at rest, when it's in transit,
and while it's being processed.
Safeguards against insider access.
Support for numerous privacy regulations.
The following recommendations address additional controls that you can
implement. For more information, see
Privacy Resource Center
.
Control data residency
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Data residency describes where your data is stored at rest. Data residency
requirements vary based on system design objectives, industry regulatory
concerns, national law, tax implications, and even culture.
Controlling data residency starts with the following:
Understand your data type and its location.
Determine what risks exist for your data and which laws and regulations
apply.
Control where your data is stored or where it goes.
To help you comply with data residency requirements, Google Cloud lets
you control where your data is stored, how it's accessed, and how it's
processed. You can use
resource location policies
to restrict where resources are created and to limit where data is replicated
between regions. You can use the location property of a resource to identify
where the service is deployed and who maintains it. For more information, see
Resource locations supported services
.
Classify your confidential data
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Data security.
You must define what data is confidential, and then ensure that the confidential
data is properly protected. Confidential data can include credit card numbers,
addresses, phone numbers, and other personally identifiable information (PII).
Using
Sensitive Data Protection
,
you can set up appropriate classifications. You can then tag and tokenize your
data before you store it in Google Cloud. Additionally,
Dataplex Universal Catalog offers a
catalog
service that provides a platform for storing, managing, and accessing your
metadata. For more information and an example of data classification and
de-identification, see
De-identification and re-identification of PII using Sensitive Data Protection
.
Lock down access to sensitive data
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Data security
Identity and access management
Place sensitive data in its own service perimeter by using
VPC Service Controls
.
VPC Service Controls improves your ability to mitigate the risk of unauthorized
copying or transferring of data (data exfiltration) from Google-managed
services. With VPC Service Controls, you configure security perimeters around the
resources of your Google-managed services to control the movement of data across
the perimeter. Set
Google Identity and Access Management (IAM)
access controls for that data. Configure
multifactor authentication (MFA)
for all users who require access to sensitive data.
Previous
arrow_back
Use AI for security
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.