Use AI for security  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Use AI for security
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to use AI to help you improve the security of your
cloud workloads.
Because of the increasing number and sophistication of cyber attacks, it's
important to take advantage of AI's potential to help improve security. AI can
help to reduce the number of threats, reduce the manual effort required by security
professionals, and help compensate for the scarcity of experts in the cyber-security
domain.
Principle overview
Use AI capabilities to improve your existing security systems and processes.
You can use
Gemini in Security
as well as the intrinsic AI capabilities that are built into Google Cloud services.
These AI capabilities can transform security by providing assistance across
every stage of the security lifecycle. For example, you can use AI to do the
following:
Analyze and explain potentially malicious code without reverse engineering.
Reduce repetitive work for cyber-security practitioners.
Use natural language to generate queries and interact with security
event data.
Surface contextual information.
Offer recommendations for quick responses.
Aid in the remediation of events.
Summarize high-priority alerts for misconfigurations and
vulnerabilities, highlight potential impacts, and recommend mitigations.
Levels of security autonomy
AI and automation can help you achieve better security outcomes when you're
dealing with ever-evolving cyber-security threats. By using AI for security, you
can achieve greater levels of autonomy to detect and prevent threats and improve
your overall security posture. Google defines four
levels of autonomy
when you use AI for security, and they outline the increasing role of AI in
assisting and eventually leading security tasks:
Manual
: Humans run all of the security tasks (prevent, detect,
prioritize, and respond) across the entire security lifecycle.
Assisted
: AI tools, like Gemini, boost human
productivity by summarizing information, generating insights, and making
recommendations.
Semi-autonomous
: AI takes primary responsibility for many security
tasks and delegates to humans only when required.
Autonomous
: AI acts as a trusted assistant that drives the security
lifecycle based on your organization's goals and preferences, with minimal
human intervention.
Recommendations
The following sections describe the recommendations for using AI for security.
The sections also indicate how the recommendations align with Google's Secure AI
Framework (SAIF)
core elements
and how they're relevant to the
levels of security autonomy
.
Enhance threat detection and response with AI
Simplify security for experts and non-experts
Automate time-consuming security tasks with AI
Incorporate AI into risk management and governance processes
Implement secure development practices for AI systems
Enhance threat detection and response with AI
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Security operations (SecOps)
Logging, auditing, and monitoring
AI can analyze large volumes of security data, offer insights into threat actor
behavior, and automate the analysis of potentially malicious code. This
recommendation is aligned with the following SAIF elements:
Extend detection and response to bring AI into your organization's
threat universe.
Automate defenses to keep pace with existing and new threats.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the
following levels of autonomy:
Assisted
: AI helps with threat analysis and detection.
Semi-autonomous
: AI takes on more responsibility for the security task.
Google Threat Intelligence
,
which uses AI to analyze threat actor behavior and malicious code, can help you
implement this recommendation.
Simplify security for experts and non-experts
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Security operations (SecOps)
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
AI-powered tools can summarize alerts and recommend mitigations, and these
capabilities can make security more accessible to a wider range of personnel.
This recommendation is aligned with the following SAIF elements:
Automate defenses to keep pace with existing and new threats.
Harmonize platform-level controls to ensure consistent security across
the organization.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the
following levels of autonomy:
Assisted
: AI helps you to improve the accessibility of security
information.
Semi-autonomous
: AI helps to make security practices more effective
for all users.
Gemini in
Security Command Center
can provide summaries of alerts for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities.
Automate time-consuming security tasks with AI
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Infrastructure security
Security operations (SecOps)
Application security
AI can automate tasks such as analyzing malware, generating security rules, and
identifying misconfigurations. These capabilities can help to reduce the
workload on security teams and accelerate response times. This recommendation is
aligned with the SAIF element about automating defenses to keep pace with
existing and new threats.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the
following levels of autonomy:
Assisted
: AI helps you to automate tasks.
Semi-autonomous
: AI takes primary responsibility for security tasks,
and only requests human assistance when needed.
Gemini in
Google SecOps
can help to automate high-toil tasks by assisting analysts, retrieving relevant
context, and making recommendations for next steps.
Incorporate AI into risk management and governance processes
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
You can use AI to build a model inventory and risk profiles. You can also use AI
to implement policies for data privacy, cyber risk, and third-party risk. This
recommendation is aligned with the SAIF element about contextualizing AI system
risks in surrounding business processes.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the
semi-autonomous level of autonomy. At this level, AI can orchestrate security
agents that run processes to achieve your custom security goals.
Implement secure development practices for AI systems
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Application security
AI and ML security
You can use AI for secure coding, cleaning training data, and validating tools
and artifacts. This recommendation is aligned with the SAIF element about
expanding strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem.
This recommendation can be relevant to all levels of security autonomy, because
a secure AI system needs to be in place before AI can be used effectively for
security. The recommendation is most relevant to the assisted level, where
security practices are augmented by AI.
To implement this recommendation, follow the
Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA)
guidelines for AI artifacts and use validated container images.
Previous
arrow_back
Use AI securely and responsibly
Next
Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.