Continuously monitor and improve performance  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Continuously monitor and improve performance
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-12-06 UTC
This principle in the performance optimization pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to help you continuously monitor and improve performance.
After you deploy applications, continuously monitor their performance by using
logs, tracing, metrics, and alerts. As your applications grow and evolve, you
can use the trends in these data points to re-assess your performance
requirements. You might eventually need to redesign parts of your applications
to maintain or improve their performance.
Principle overview
The process of continuous performance improvement requires robust monitoring
tools and strategies. Cloud observability tools can help you to collect key
performance indicators (KPIs) such as latency, throughput, error rates, and
resource utilization. Cloud environments offer a variety of methods to conduct
granular performance assessments across the application, the network, and the
end-user experience.
Improving performance is an ongoing effort that requires a multi-faceted
approach. The following key mechanisms and processes can help you to boost
performance:
To provide clear direction and help track progress, define performance
objectives that align with your business goals. Set SMART goals: specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound.
To measure performance and identify areas for
improvement, gather KPI metrics.
To continuously monitor your systems for issues, use visualized
workflows in monitoring tools. Use architecture process mapping techniques
to identify redundancies and inefficiencies.
To create a culture of ongoing improvement, provide training and programs
that support your employees' growth.
To encourage proactive and continuous improvement, incentivize your employees
and customers to provide ongoing feedback about your application's performance.
Recommendations
To promote modular designs, consider the recommendations in the following
sections.
Define clear performance goals and metrics
Define clear performance objectives that align with your business goals. This
requires a deep understanding of your application's architecture and the
performance requirements of each application component.
As a priority, optimize the most critical components that directly influence your
core business functions and user experience. To help ensure that these components
continue to run efficiently and meet your business needs, set specific and
measurable performance targets. These targets can include response times, error
rates, and resource utilization thresholds.
This proactive approach can help you to identify and address potential bottlenecks,
optimize resource allocation, and ultimately deliver a seamless and
high-performing experience for your users.
Monitor performance
Continuously monitor your cloud systems for performance issues and set up
alerts for any potential problems. Monitoring and alerts can help you to catch
and fix issues before they affect users. Application profiling can help to
identify bottlenecks and can help to optimize resource use.
You can use tools that facilitate effective troubleshooting and network
optimization. Use
Google Cloud Observability
to identify areas that have
high CPU consumption, memory consumption, or network consumption. These
capabilities can help developers improve efficiency,
reduce costs, and enhance the user experience.
Network Intelligence Center
shows
visualizations of the topology of your network infrastructure, and can help you
to identify high-latency paths.
Incentivize continuous improvement
Create a culture of ongoing improvement that can benefit both the application and
the user experience.
Provide your employees with training and development opportunities that enhance
their skills and knowledge in performance techniques across cloud services.
Establish a community of practice (CoP) and offer mentorship and coaching
programs to support employee growth.
To prevent
reactive
performance management and encourage proactive performance
management, encourage ongoing feedback from your employees, your customers, and
your stakeholders. You can consider gamifying the process by tracking KPIs on
performance and presenting those metrics to teams on a frequent basis in the
form of a league table.
To understand your performance and user happiness over time, we recommend that
you measure user feedback quantitatively and qualitatively. The
HEART
framework can help you capture user feedback across five categories:
Happiness
Engagement
Adoption
Retention
Task success
By using such a framework, you can incentivize engineers with data-driven
feedback, user-centered metrics, actionable insights, and a clear understanding
of goals.
Previous
arrow_back
Promote modular design
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-12-06 UTC.