Foster a culture of cost awareness  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Foster a culture of cost awareness
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2024-09-25 UTC
This principle in the cost optimization pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to promote cost awareness across your organization and
ensure that team members have the cost information that they need to make
informed decisions.
Conventionally, the responsibility for cost management might be centralized to a
few select stakeholders and primarily focused on initial project architecture
decisions. However, team members across all cloud user roles (analyst, architect,
developer, or administrator) can help to reduce the cost of your resources in
Google Cloud. By sharing cost data appropriately, you can empower team
members to make cost-effective decisions throughout their development and
deployment processes.
Principle overview
Stakeholders across various roles – product owners, developers, deployment
engineers, administrators, and financial analysts – need visibility into relevant
cost data and its relationship to business value. When provisioning and managing
cloud resources, they need the following data:
Projected resource costs
: Cost estimates at the time of design and
deployment.
Real-time resource usage costs
: Up-to-date cost data that can be used for
ongoing monitoring and budget validation.
Costs mapped to business metrics
: Insights into how cloud spending affects
key performance indicators (KPIs), to enable teams to identify cost-effective
strategies.
Every individual might not need access to raw cost data. However, promoting cost
awareness across all roles is crucial because individual decisions can affect
costs.
By promoting cost visibility and ensuring clear ownership of cost management
practices, you ensure that everyone is aware of the financial implications of
their choices and everyone actively contributes to the organization's cost
optimization goals. Whether through a centralized FinOps team or a distributed
model, establishing accountability is crucial for effective cost optimization
efforts.
Recommendations
To promote cost awareness and ensure that your team members have the cost
information that they need to make informed decisions, consider the following
recommendations.
Provide organization-wide cost visibility
To achieve organization-wide cost visibility, the teams that are responsible for
cost management can take the following actions:
Standardize cost calculation and budgeting
: Use a consistent method to
determine the full costs of cloud resources, after factoring in discounts and
shared costs. Establish clear and standardized budgeting processes that align
with your organization's goals and enable proactive cost management.
Use standardized cost management and visibility tools
: Use appropriate
tools that provide real-time insights into cloud spending and generate
regular (for example, weekly) cost progression snapshots. These tools enable
proactive budgeting, forecasting, and identification of optimization
opportunities. The tools could be cloud provider tools
(like the
Google Cloud Billing dashboard
),
third-party solutions, or open-source solutions like the
Cost Attribution solution
.
Implement a cost allocation system
: Allocate a portion of the overall
cloud budget to each team or project. Such an allocation gives the teams a
sense of ownership over cloud spending and encourages them to make
cost-effective decisions within their allocated budget.
Promote transparency
: Encourage teams to discuss cost implications during
the design and decision-making processes. Create a safe and supportive
environment for sharing ideas and concerns related to cost optimization.
Some organizations use positive reinforcement mechanisms like leaderboards
or recognition programs. If your organization has restrictions on sharing
raw cost data due to business concerns, explore alternative approaches for
sharing cost information and insights. For example, consider sharing
aggregated metrics (like the total cost for an environment or feature) or
relative metrics (like the average cost per transaction or user).
Understand how cloud resources are billed
Pricing for Google Cloud resources might vary across
regions
.
Some resources are billed monthly at a fixed price, and others might be billed
based on usage.
To understand how Google Cloud resources are billed, use the
Google Cloud pricing calculator
and product-specific pricing information (for example,
Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) pricing
).
Understand resource-based cost optimization options
For each type of cloud resource that you plan to use, explore strategies to
optimize utilization and efficiency. The strategies include rightsizing,
autoscaling, and adopting serverless technologies where appropriate. The following
are examples of cost optimization options for a few Google Cloud products:
Cloud Run lets you configure
always-allocated CPUs
to handle predictable traffic loads at a fraction of the price of the default
allocation method (that is, CPUs allocated only during request processing).
You can purchase
BigQuery slot commitments
to save money on data analysis.
GKE
provides detailed metrics to help you understand cost optimization options.
Understand how
network pricing
can affect the cost of data transfers and how you can optimize costs for
specific networking services. For example, you can reduce the data transfer
costs for external Application Load Balancers by using Cloud CDN or Google Cloud Armor.
For more information, see
Ways to lower external Application Load Balancer costs
.
Understand discount-based cost optimization options
Familiarize yourself with the discount programs that Google Cloud offers,
such as the following examples:
Committed use discounts (CUDs)
:
CUDs are suitable for resources that have predictable and steady usage. CUDs
let you get significant reductions in price in exchange for committing to
specific resource usage over a period (typically one to three years). You
can also use
CUD auto-renewal
to avoid having to manually repurchase commitments when they expire.
Sustained use discounts
:
For certain Google Cloud products like Compute Engine and
GKE, you can get automatic discount credits after
continuous resource usage beyond specific duration thresholds.
Spot VMs
:
For fault-tolerant and flexible workloads, Spot VMs can help to
reduce your Compute Engine costs. The cost of Spot VMs is
significantly lower than regular VMs. However, Compute Engine might
preemptively stop or delete Spot VMs to reclaim capacity.
Spot VMs are suitable for batch jobs that can tolerate preemption
and don't have high availability requirements.
Discounts for specific product options
: Some managed services like
BigQuery offer
discounts
when you purchase dedicated or autoscaling query processing capacity.
Evaluate and choose the discounts options that align with your workload
characteristics and usage patterns.
Incorporate cost estimates into architecture blueprints
Encourage teams to develop architecture blueprints that include cost estimates
for different deployment options and configurations. This practice empowers teams
to compare costs proactively and make informed decisions that align with both
technical and financial objectives.
Use a consistent and standard set of labels for all your resources
You can use
labels
to track costs and to identify and classify resources. Specifically, you can use
labels to allocate costs to different projects, departments, or cost centers.
Defining a
formal labeling policy
that aligns with the needs of the main stakeholders in your organization helps
to make costs visible more widely. You can also use labels to filter resource
cost and usage data based on target audience.
Use automation tools like Terraform to enforce labeling on every resource that
is created. To enhance cost visibility and attribution further, you can use the
tools provided by the open-source
cost attribution solution
.
Share cost reports with team members
By sharing cost reports with your team members, you empower them to take
ownership of their cloud spending. This practice enables cost-effective decision
making, continuous cost optimization, and systematic improvements to your cost
allocation model.
Cost reports can be of several types, including the following:
Periodic cost reports
: Regular reports inform teams about their current
cloud spending. Conventionally, these reports might be spreadsheet exports.
More effective methods include automated emails and specialized dashboards.
To ensure that cost reports provide relevant and actionable information
 without overwhelming recipients with unnecessary detail, the reports must
 be tailored to the target audiences. Setting up tailored reports is a
 foundational step toward more real-time and interactive cost visibility and
 management.
Automated notifications
: You can configure cost reports to proactively
notify relevant stakeholders (for example, through email or chat) about cost
anomalies, budget thresholds, or opportunities for cost optimization. By
providing timely information directly to those who can act on it, automated
alerts encourage prompt action and foster a proactive approach to cost
optimization.
Google Cloud dashboards
: You can use the
built-in billing dashboards
in Google Cloud to get insights into cost breakdowns and to identify
opportunities for cost optimization. Google Cloud also provides
FinOps hub
to help you monitor savings and get recommendations for cost optimization.
An AI engine powers the FinOps hub to recommend cost optimization
opportunities for all the resources that are currently deployed. To control
access to these recommendations, you can implement role-based access control
(RBAC).
Custom dashboards
: You can create custom dashboards by exporting cost
data to an analytics database, like
BigQuery
.
Use a visualization tool like
Looker Studio
to connect to the analytics database to build interactive reports and enable
fine-grained access control through role-based permissions.
Multicloud cost reports
: For multicloud deployments, you need a
unified view of costs across all the cloud providers to ensure comprehensive
analysis, budgeting, and optimization. Use tools like BigQuery
to centralize and analyze cost data from multiple cloud providers, and use
Looker Studio to build team-specific interactive reports.
Previous
arrow_back
Align spending with business value
Next
Optimize resource usage
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2024-09-25 UTC.