Implement preemptive cyber defense  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Implement preemptive cyber defense
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to build robust cyber-defense programs as part of your
overall security strategy.
This principle emphasizes the use of threat intelligence to proactively guide
your efforts across the core cyber-defense functions, as defined in
The Defender's Advantage: A guide to activating cyber defense
.
Principle overview
When you defend your system against cyber attacks, you have a significant,
underutilized advantage against attackers. As
the founder of Mandiant states
,
"You should know more about your business, your systems, your topology, your
infrastructure than any attacker does. This is an incredible advantage." To
help you use this inherent advantage, this document provides recommendations
about proactive and strategic cyber-defense practices that are mapped to the
Defender's Advantage framework.
Recommendations
To implement preemptive cyber defense for your cloud workloads, consider the
recommendations in the following sections:
Integrate the functions of cyber defense
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts
Integrate the functions of cyber defense
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
The Defender's Advantage framework identifies six critical functions of
cyber defense:
Intelligence
,
Detect
,
Respond
,
Validate
,
Hunt
, and
Mission Control.
Each function focuses on a unique part of the
cyber-defense mission, but these functions must be well-coordinated and
work together to provide an effective defense. Focus on building a robust
and integrated system where each function supports the others. If you need
a phased approach for adoption, consider the following suggested order.
Depending on your current cloud maturity, resource topology, and specific
threat landscape, you might want to prioritize certain functions.
Intelligence
: The Intelligence function guides all the other
functions. Understanding the threat landscape—including the most likely
attackers, their tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), and the
potential impact—is critical to prioritizing actions across the entire
program. The Intelligence function is responsible for stakeholder
identification, definition of intelligence requirements, data collection,
analysis and dissemination, automation, and the creation of a cyber
threat profile.
Detect and Respond
: These functions make up the core of active
defense, which involves identifying and addressing malicious activity.
These functions are necessary to act on the intelligence that's gathered by
the intelligence function. The Detect function requires a methodical
approach that aligns detections to attacker TTPs and ensures robust
logging. The Respond function must focus on initial triage, data
collection, and incident remediation.
Validate
: The Validate function is a continuous process that
provides assurance that your security control ecosystem is up-to-date and
operating as designed. This function ensures that your organization
understands the attack surface, knows where vulnerabilities exist, and
measures the effectiveness of controls. Security validation is also an
important component of the detection engineering lifecycle and must be used
to identify detection gaps and create new detections.
Hunt
: The Hunt function involves proactively searching for active
threats within an environment. This function must be implemented when your
organization has a baseline level of maturity in the Detect and Respond
functions. The Hunt function expands the detection capabilities and helps
to identify gaps and weaknesses in controls. The Hunt function must be
based on specific threats. This advanced function benefits from a
foundation of robust intelligence, detection, and response capabilities.
Mission Control
: The Mission Control function acts as the central
hub that connects all of the other functions. This function is
responsible for strategy, communication, and decisive action across your
cyber-defense program. It ensures that all of the functions are working
together and that they're aligned with your organization's business goals.
You must focus on establishing a clear understanding of the purpose of the
Mission Control function before you use it to connect the other functions.
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
This recommendation highlights the Intelligence function as a core part of a strong
cyber-defense program. Threat intelligence provides knowledge about threat
actors, their TTPs, and indicators of compromise (IOCs). This knowledge should
inform and prioritize actions across all cyber-defense functions. An
intelligence-driven approach helps you align defenses to meet the threats that
are most likely to affect your organization. This approach also helps with
efficient allocation and prioritization of resources.
The following Google Cloud products and features help you take advantage
of threat intelligence to guide your security operations. Use these features to
identify and prioritize potential threats, vulnerabilities, and risks, and then
plan and implement appropriate actions.
Google Security Operations (Google SecOps)
helps you store and analyze security data centrally. Use
Google SecOps to map logs into a common model, enrich the
logs, and link the logs to timelines for a comprehensive view of attacks.
You can also create detection rules, set up IoC matching, and perform
threat-hunting activities. The platform also provides curated detections,
which are predefined and managed rules to help identify threats.
Google SecOps can also integrate with
Mandiant frontline intelligence
.
Google SecOps uniquely integrates industry-leading AI, along
with
threat intelligence from Mandiant
and
Google VirusTotal
.
This integration is critical for threat evaluation and understanding who is
targeting your organization and the potential impact.
Security Command Center
Enterprise, which is powered by Google AI, enables security professionals to
efficiently assess, investigate, and respond to security issues across
multiple cloud environments. The security professionals who can benefit
from Security Command Center include security operations center (SOC) analysts,
vulnerability and posture analysts, and compliance managers. Security Command Center
Enterprise enriches security data, assesses risk, and prioritizes
vulnerabilities. This solution provides teams with the information that they
need to address high-risk vulnerabilities and to remediate active threats.
Chrome Enterprise Premium
offers threat and data protection, which helps to protect users from
exfiltration risks and prevents malware from getting onto
enterprise-managed devices. Chrome Enterprise Premium also provides visibility into
unsafe or potentially unsafe activity that can happen within the browser.
Network monitoring, through tools like
Network Intelligence Center
,
provides visibility into network performance. Network monitoring can also
help you detect unusual traffic patterns or detect data transfer amounts
that might indicate an attack or data exfiltration attempt.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
As mentioned earlier, you have an advantage over attackers when you have
a thorough understanding of your business, systems, topology, and
infrastructure. To capitalize on this knowledge advantage, utilize this data
about your environments during cyberdefense planning.
Google Cloud provides the following features to help you proactively gain
visibility to identify threats, understand risks, and respond in a timely manner
to mitigate potential damage:
Chrome Enterprise Premium helps you enhance security for enterprise devices by
protecting users from exfiltration risks. It extends
Sensitive Data Protection services
into the browser, and prevents malware. It also offers features like
protection against malware and phishing to help prevent exposure to unsafe
content. In addition, it gives you control over the installation of
extensions to help prevent unsafe or unvetted extensions. These
capabilities help you establish a secure foundation for your operations.
Security Command Center Enterprise provides a continuous
risk engine
that offers comprehensive and ongoing risk analysis and management. The risk
engine feature enriches security data, assesses risk, and prioritizes
vulnerabilities to help fix issues quickly. Security Command Center enables your
organization to proactively identify weaknesses and implement mitigations.
Google SecOps centralizes security data and provides
enriched logs with timelines. This enables defenders to proactively
identify active compromises and adapt defenses based on attackers' behavior.
Network monitoring helps identify irregular network activity that might
indicate an attack and it provides early indicators that you can use to take
action. To help proactively protect your data from theft, continuously monitor
for data exfiltration and use the provided tools.
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
This recommendation emphasizes the importance of targeted testing and
continuous validation of controls to understand strengths and weaknesses
across the entire attack surface. This includes validating the
effectiveness of controls, operations, and staff through methods like the
following:
Penetration tests
Red-blue team
and
purple team
exercises
Tabletop exercises
You must also actively search for threats and use the results to improve
detection and visibility. Use the following tools to continuously test and
validate your defenses against real-world threats:
Security Command Center Enterprise provides a continuous risk engine to evaluate
vulnerabilities and prioritize remediation, which enables ongoing
evaluation of your overall security posture. By prioritizing issues,
Security Command Center Enterprise helps you to ensure that resources are used effectively.
Google SecOps offers threat-hunting and curated
detections that let you proactively identify weaknesses in your controls.
This capability enables continuous testing and improvement of your ability
to detect threats.
Chrome Enterprise Premium provides threat and data protection features that
can help you to address new and evolving threats, and continuously update
your defenses against exfiltration risks and malware.
Cloud Next Generation Firewall (Cloud NGFW) provides network monitoring
and data-exfiltration monitoring. These capabilities can help you to validate
the effectiveness of your current security posture and identify potential
weaknesses. Data-exfiltration monitoring helps you to validate the strength
of your organization's data protection mechanisms and make proactive
adjustments where necessary. When you integrate threat findings from
Cloud NGFW with Security Command Center and Google SecOps,
you can optimize network-based threat detection, optimize threat response,
and automate playbooks. For more information about this integration, see
Unifying Your Cloud Defenses: Security Command Center & Cloud NGFW Enterprise
.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts
This recommendation is relevant to all of the
focus areas
.
As described earlier in
Integrate the functions of cyber defense
,
the Mission Control function interconnects the other functions of the
cyber-defense program. This function enables coordination and unified
management across the program. It also helps you coordinate with other teams
that don't work on cybersecurity. The Mission Control function promotes
empowerment and accountability, facilitates agility and expertise, and drives
responsibility and transparency.
The following products and features can help you implement the Mission Control
function:
Security Command Center Enterprise acts as a central hub for coordinating and
managing your cyber-defense operations. It brings tools, teams, and data
together, along with the built-in Google SecOps response
capabilities. Security Command Center provides clear visibility into your
organization's security state and enables the identification of security
misconfigurations across different resources.
Google SecOps provides a platform for teams to respond to
threats by mapping logs and creating timelines. You can also define
detection rules and search for threats.
Google Workspace
and Chrome Enterprise Premium help you to manage and control end-user access to
sensitive resources. You can define granular access controls based on user
identity and the context of a request.
Network monitoring provides insights into the performance of network
resources. You can import network monitoring insights into Security Command Center
and Google SecOps for centralized monitoring and correlation
against other timeline based data points. This integration helps you to
detect and respond to potential network usage changes caused by nefarious
activity.
Data-exfiltration monitoring helps to identify possible data loss
incidents. With this feature, you can efficiently mobilize an incident
response team, assess damages, and limit further data exfiltration. You can
also improve current policies and controls to ensure data protection.
Product summary
The following table lists the products and features that are described in this
document and maps them to the associated recommendations and security
capabilities.
Google Cloud product
Applicable recommendations
Google SecOps
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
:
      Enables threat hunting and IoC matching, and integrates with
      Mandiant for comprehensive threat evaluation.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's
      advantage
: Provides curated detections and centralizes
      security data for proactive compromise identification.
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
:
      Enables continuous testing and improvement of threat detection
      capabilities.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission
      Control
: Provides a platform for threat response, log
      analysis, and timeline creation.
Security Command Center Enterprise
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
:
      Uses AI to assess risk, prioritize vulnerabilities, and provide
      actionable insights for remediation.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's
      advantage
: Offers comprehensive risk analysis, vulnerability
      prioritization, and proactive identification of weaknesses.
Validate and improve your
      defenses continuously
: Provides ongoing security posture
      evaluation and resource prioritization.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission
      Control
: Acts as a central hub for managing and coordinating
      cyber-defense operations.
Chrome Enterprise Premium
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
:
      Protects users from exfiltration risks, prevents malware, and
      provides visibility into unsafe browser activity.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's
      advantage
: Enhances security for enterprise devices through
      data protection, malware prevention, and control over
      extensions.
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
:
      Addresses new and evolving threats through continuous updates to
      defenses against exfiltration risks and malware.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission
      Control
: Manage and control end-user access to sensitive
      resources, including granular access controls.
Google Workspace
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission
      Control
: Manage and control end-user access to sensitive
      resources, including granular access controls.
Network Intelligence Center
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
:
      Provides visibility into network performance and detects unusual
      traffic patterns or data transfers.
Cloud NGFW
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
:
      Optimizes network-based threat detection and response through
      integration with Security Command Center and Google SecOps.
Previous
arrow_back
Implement shift-left security
Next
Use AI securely and responsibly
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.