Well-Architected Framework: Security, privacy, and compliance pillar  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Well-Architected Framework: Security, privacy, and compliance pillar
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
The Security, Privacy and Compliance pillar in the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to help you design, deploy, and operate cloud workloads
that meet your requirements for security, privacy, and compliance.
This document is designed to offer valuable insights and meet the needs of a
range of security professionals and engineers. The following table describes
the intended audiences for this document:
Audience
What this document provides
Chief information security officers (CISOs), business unit leaders,
and IT managers
A general framework to establish and maintain security excellence in
the cloud and to ensure a comprehensive view of security areas to
make informed decisions about security investments.
Security architects and engineers
Key security practices for the design and operational phases to help
ensure that solutions are designed for security, efficiency, and
scalability.
DevSecOps teams
Guidance to incorporate overarching security controls to plan
automation that enables secure and reliable infrastructure.
Compliance officers and risk managers
Key security recommendations to follow a structured approach to risk
management with safeguards that help to meet compliance
obligations.
To ensure that your Google Cloud workloads meet your security, privacy,
and compliance requirements, all of the stakeholders in your organization must
adopt a collaborative approach. In addition, you must recognize that cloud
security is a shared responsibility between you and Google. For more
information, see
Shared responsibilities and shared fate on Google Cloud
.
The recommendations in this pillar are grouped into core security principles.
Each principle-based recommendation is mapped to one or more of the
focus areas of cloud security
that might be critical to your organization. Each
recommendation highlights guidance about the use and configuration of
Google Cloud products and capabilities to help improve your organization's
security posture.
Core principles
The recommendations in this pillar are grouped within the following core
principles of security. Every principle in this pillar is important. Depending
on the requirements of your organization and workload, you might choose to
prioritize certain principles.
Implement security by design
:
Integrate cloud security and network security considerations starting from
the initial design phase of your applications and infrastructure.
Google Cloud provides architecture blueprints and recommendations to
help you apply this principle.
Implement zero trust
:
Use a
never trust, always verify
approach, where access to resources is
granted based on continuous verification of trust. Google Cloud
supports this principle through products like Chrome Enterprise Premium and
Identity-Aware Proxy (IAP).
Implement shift-left security
:
Implement security controls early in the software development lifecycle.
Avoid security defects before system changes are made. Detect and fix
security bugs early, fast, and reliably after the system changes are
committed. Google Cloud supports this principle through products like
Cloud Build, Binary Authorization, and Artifact Registry.
Implement preemptive cyber defense
:
Adopt a proactive approach to security by implementing robust fundamental
measures like threat intelligence. This approach helps you build a
foundation for more effective threat detection and response.
Google Cloud's
approach to layered security controls
aligns with this principle.
Use AI securely and responsibly
:
Develop and deploy AI systems in a responsible and secure manner. The
recommendations for this principle are aligned with guidance in the
AI and ML perspective
of the Well-Architected Framework and in Google's
Secure AI Framework (SAIF)
.
Use AI for security
:
Use AI capabilities to improve your existing security systems and processes
through
Gemini in Security
and overall platform-security capabilities. Use AI as a tool to increase
the automation of remedial work and ensure security hygiene to make other
systems more secure.
Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs
:
Adhere to industry-specific regulations, compliance standards, and privacy
requirements. Google Cloud helps you meet these obligations through
products like Assured Workloads, Organization Policy Service, and our
compliance resource center
.
Organizational security mindset
A security-focused organizational mindset is crucial for successful cloud
adoption and operation. This mindset should be deeply ingrained in your
organization's culture and reflected in its practices, which are guided by core
security principles as described earlier.
An organizational security mindset emphasizes that you think about security
during system design, assume zero trust, and integrate security features
throughout your development process. In this mindset, you also think proactively
about cyber-defense measures, use AI securely and for security, and consider
your regulatory, privacy, and compliance requirements. By embracing these
principles, your organization can cultivate a security-first culture that
proactively addresses threats, protects valuable assets, and helps to ensure
responsible technology usage.
Focus areas of cloud security
This section describes the areas for you to focus on when you plan,
implement, and manage security for your applications, systems, and data. The
recommendations in each principle of this pillar are relevant to one or more of
these focus areas. Throughout the rest of this document, the recommendations
specify the corresponding security focus areas to provide further clarity and
context.
Focus area
Activities and components
Related Google Cloud products, capabilities, and solutions
Infrastructure security
Secure network infrastructure.
Encrypt data in transit and at rest.
Control traffic flow.
Secure IaaS and PaaS services.
Protect against unauthorized access.
Firewall
Policies
VPC Service Controls
Google Cloud Armor
Cloud Next Generation Firewall
Secure Web Proxy
Identity and access management
Use authentication, authorization, and access controls.
Manage cloud identities.
Manage identity and access management policies.
Cloud Identity
Google's Identity and Access Management (IAM) service
Workforce Identity Federation
Workload Identity Federation
Data security
Store data in Google Cloud securely.
Control access to the data.
Discover and classify the data.
Design necessary controls, such as encryption, access controls,
        and data loss prevention.
Protect data at rest, in transit, and in use.
Google's IAM service
Sensitive Data Protection
VPC Service Controls
Cloud KMS
Confidential Computing
AI and ML security
Apply security controls at different layers of the AI and ML
        infrastructure and pipeline.
Ensure model safety.
Google's SAIF
Model Armor
Security operations (SecOps)
Adopt a modern SecOps platform and set of practices, for effective
        incident management, threat detection, and response processes.
Monitor systems and applications continuously for security events.
Google Security Operations
Application security
Secure applications against software vulnerabilities and attacks.
Artifact Registry
Artifact Analysis
Binary Authorization
Assured Open Source Software
Google Cloud Armor
Web Security Scanner
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Establish policies, procedures, and controls to manage cloud
        resources effectively and securely.
Organization Policy Service
Cloud Asset Inventory
Security Command Center
        Enterprise
Resource Manager
Logging, auditing, and monitoring
Analyze logs to identify potential threats.
Track and record system activities for compliance and security
        analysis.
Cloud Logging
Cloud Monitoring
Cloud Audit Logs
VPC Flow Logs
Contributors
Authors:
Wade Holmes
| Global Solutions Director
Hector Diaz
| Cloud Security Architect
Carlos Leonardo Rosario | Google Cloud Security Specialist
John Bacon
| Partner Solutions Architect
Sachin Kalra
| Global Security Solution Manager
Other contributors:
Anton Chuvakin
| Security Advisor, Office of the CISO
Daniel Lees
| Cloud Security Architect
Filipe Gracio, PhD
| Customer Engineer, AI/ML Specialist
Gary Harmson
| Principal Architect
Gino Pelliccia
| Principal Architect
Jose Andrade
| Customer Engineer, SRE Specialist
Kumar Dhanagopal
| Cross-Product Solution Developer
Laura Hyatt
| Customer Engineer, FSI
Marwan Al Shawi
| Partner Customer Engineer
Nicolas Pintaux
| Customer Engineer, Application Modernization Specialist
Noah McDonald
| Cloud Security Consultant
Osvaldo Costa
| Networking Specialist Customer Engineer
Radhika Kanakam
| Program Lead, Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
Samantha He
| Technical Writer
Susan Wu
| Outbound Product Manager
Next
Implement security by design
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.