Shared responsibilities and shared fate on Google Cloud  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Shared responsibilities and shared fate on Google Cloud
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2023-08-21 UTC
This document describes the differences between the shared responsibility model
and shared fate in Google Cloud. It discusses the challenges and nuances
of the shared responsibility model. This document describes what shared fate is
and how we partner with our customers to address cloud security challenges.
Understanding the shared responsibility model is important when determining how
to best protect your data and workloads on Google Cloud. The shared
responsibility model describes the tasks that you have when it comes to security
in the cloud and how these tasks are different for cloud providers.
Understanding shared responsibility, however, can be challenging. The model
requires an in-depth understanding of each service you utilize, the
configuration options that each service provides, and what Google Cloud
does to secure the service. Every service has a different configuration profile,
and it can be difficult to determine the best security configuration. Google believes that the shared responsibility model stops short
of helping cloud customers achieve better security outcomes. Instead of shared
responsibility, we believe in
shared fate
.
Shared fate includes us building and operating a trusted cloud platform for
your workloads. We provide best practice guidance and secured, attested
infrastructure code that you can use to deploy your workloads in a secure way.
We release solutions that combine various Google Cloud services to solve
complex security problems and we offer innovative insurance options to help you
measure and mitigate the risks that you must accept. Shared fate involves us
more closely interacting with you as you secure your resources on
Google Cloud.
Shared responsibility
You're the expert in knowing the security and regulatory requirements for your
business, and knowing the requirements for protecting your confidential data and
resources. When you run your workloads on Google Cloud, you must identify
the security controls that you need to configure in Google Cloud to help
protect your confidential data and each workload. To decide which security
controls to implement, you must consider the following factors:
Your regulatory compliance obligations
Your organization's security standards and risk management plan
Security requirements of your customers and your vendors
Defined by workloads
Traditionally, responsibilities are defined based on the type of workload that
you're running and the cloud services that you require. Cloud services include
the following categories:
Cloud service
Description
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
IaaS services include
Compute Engine
,
Cloud Storage
, and networking
services such as
Cloud VPN
,
Cloud Load Balancing
, and
Cloud DNS
.
IaaS provides compute, storage, and network services on demand with
pay-as-you-go pricing. You can use IaaS if you plan on migrating an
existing on-premises workload to the cloud using lift-and-shift, or
if you want to run your application on particular VMs, using specific
databases or network configurations.
In IaaS, the bulk of the security responsibilities are yours, and our
responsibilities are focused on the underlying infrastructure and
physical security.
Platform as a service (PaaS)
PaaS services include
App Engine
,
Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE)
, and
BigQuery
.
PaaS provides the runtime environment that you can develop and run
your applications in. You can use PaaS if you're building an
application (such as a website), and want to focus on development
not on the underlying infrastructure.
In PaaS, we're responsible for more controls than in IaaS. Typically, this will vary by the services and features that you use. You share responsibility with us for
application-level controls and IAM management. You
remain responsible for your data security and client protection.
Software as a service (SaaS)
SaaS applications include
Google Workspace
,
Google Security Operations
, and
third-party SaaS applications that are available in
Google Cloud Marketplace
.
SaaS provides online applications that you can subscribe to or pay
for in some way. You can use SaaS applications when your enterprise
doesn't have the internal expertise or business requirement to build
the application themselves, but does require the ability to process
workloads.
In SaaS, we own the bulk of the security responsibilities. You remain
responsible for your access controls and the data that you choose to
store in the application.
Function as a service (FaaS) or serverless
FaaS provides the platform for developers to run small,
single-purpose code (called
functions
) that run in response
to particular events. You would use FaaS when you want particular
things to occur based on a particular event. For example, you might
create a function that runs whenever data is uploaded to
Cloud Storage so that it can be classified.
FaaS has a similar shared responsibility list as SaaS.
Cloud Run functions
is a FaaS
application.
The following diagram shows the cloud services and defines how responsibilities
are shared between the cloud provider and customer.
As the diagram shows, the cloud provider always remains responsible for the
underlying network and infrastructure, and customers always remain responsible
for their access policies and data.
Defined by industry and regulatory framework
Various industries have regulatory frameworks that define the security controls
that must be in place. When you move your workloads to the cloud, you must
understand the following:
Which security controls are your responsibility
Which security controls are available as part of the cloud offering
Which default security controls are inherited
Inherited security controls (such as our
default encryption
and
infrastructure controls
)
are controls that you can provide as part of your evidence of your security
posture to auditors and regulators. For example, the Payment Card Industry Data
Security Standard (PCI DSS) defines regulations for payment processors. When you
move your business to the cloud, these regulations are shared between you and
your CSP. To understand how PCI DSS responsibilities are shared between you and
Google Cloud, see
Google Cloud: PCI DSS Shared Responsibility Matrix
.
As another example, in the United States, the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) has set standards for handling electronic personal
health information (PHI). These responsibilities are also shared between the CSP
and you. For more information on how Google Cloud meets our
responsibilities under HIPAA, see
HIPAA - Compliance
.
Other industries (for example, finance or manufacturing) also have regulations
that define how data can be gathered, processed, and stored. For more
information about shared responsibility related to these, and how
Google Cloud meets our responsibilities, see
Compliance resource center
.
Defined by location
Depending on your business scenario, you might need to consider your
responsibilities based on the location of your business offices, your customers,
and your data. Different countries and regions have created regulations that
inform how you can process and store your customer's data. For example, if your
business has customers who reside in the European Union, your business might
need to abide by the requirements that are described in the
General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR), and you might be obligated to keep your customer data in the EU itself.
In this circumstance, you are responsible for ensuring that the data that you
collect remains in the
Google Cloud regions in the EU
.
For more information about how we meet our GDPR obligations, see
GDPR and Google Cloud
.
For information about the requirements related to your region, see
Compliance offerings
.
If your scenario is particularly complicated, we recommend speaking with our
sales team
or one of our
partners
to help you evaluate your security responsibilities.
Challenges for shared responsibility
Though shared responsibility helps define the security roles that you or the
cloud provider has, relying on shared responsibility can still create
challenges. Consider the following scenarios:
Most cloud security breaches are the direct result of misconfiguration
(listed as
number 3 in the Cloud Security Alliance's Pandemic 11 Report
)
and this trend is expected to increase. Cloud products are constantly
changing, and new ones are constantly being launched. Keeping up with
constant change can seem overwhelming. Customers need cloud providers to
provide them with opinionated best practices to help keep up with the
change, starting with best practices by default and having a baseline
secure configuration.
Though dividing items by cloud services is helpful, many enterprises
have workloads that require multiple cloud services types. In this
circumstance, you must consider how various security controls for these
services interact, including whether they overlap between and across
services. For example, you might have an on-premises application that
you're migrating to Compute Engine, use Google Workspace
for corporate email, and also run BigQuery to analyze data
to improve your products.
Your business and markets are constantly changing; as regulations
change, as you enter new markets, or as you acquire other companies. Your
new markets might have different requirements, and your new acquisition
might host their workloads on another cloud. To manage the constant
changes, you must constantly re-assess your risk profile and be able to
implement new controls quickly.
How and where to manage your data encryption keys is an important
decision that ties with your responsibilities to protect your data. The
option that you choose depends on your regulatory requirements, whether
you're running a hybrid cloud environment or still have an on-premises
environment, and the sensitivity of the data that you're processing and
storing.
Incident management is an important, and often overlooked, area where
your responsibilities and the cloud provider responsibilities aren't easily
defined. Many incidents require close collaboration and support from the
cloud provider to help investigate and mitigate them. Other incidents can
result from poorly configured cloud resources or stolen credentials, and
ensuring that you meet the best practices for securing your resources and
accounts can be quite challenging.
Advanced persistent threats (APTs) and new vulnerabilities can impact
your workloads in ways that you might not consider when you start your
cloud transformation. Ensuring that you remain up-to-date on the changing
landscape, and who is responsible for threat mitigation is difficult,
particularly if your business doesn't have a large security team.
Shared fate
We developed shared fate in Google Cloud to start addressing the
challenges that the shared responsibility model doesn't address. Shared fate
focuses on how all parties can better interact to continuously improve security.
Shared fate builds on the shared responsibility model because it views the
relationship between cloud provider and customer as an ongoing partnership to
improve security.
Shared fate is about us taking responsibility for making Google Cloud
more secure. Shared fate includes helping you get started with a secured
landing zone
and being clear, opinionated, and transparent about recommended security
controls, settings, and associated best practices. It includes helping you
better quantify and manage your risk with cyber-insurance, using our Risk
Protection Program. Using shared fate, we want to evolve from the standard
shared responsibility framework to a better model that helps you secure your
business and build trust in Google Cloud.
The following sections describe various components of shared fate.
Help getting started
A key component of shared fate is the resources that we provide to help you get
started, in a secure configuration in Google Cloud. Starting with a secure
configuration helps reduce the issue of misconfigurations which is the root
cause of most security breaches.
Our resources include the following:
Enterprise foundations blueprint
that discuss top security concerns and our top recommendations.
Secure blueprints
that let you deploy and maintain secure solutions using
infrastructure as
code
(IaC). Blueprints have our security recommendations enabled by
default. Many blueprints are created by Google security teams and managed
as products. This support means that they're updated regularly, go through
a rigorous testing process, and receive attestations from third-party
testing groups. Blueprints include the
enterprise foundations blueprint
and the
secured data warehouse blueprint
.
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
recommendations for building security into your designs.
Landing zone navigation guides
that step you through the top decisions that you need to make to build a
secure foundation for your workloads, including resource hierarchy,
identity onboarding, security and key management, and network structure.
Risk Protection Program
Shared fate also includes the
Risk Protection Program
(currently in preview), which helps you use the power of Google Cloud as a
platform to manage risk, rather than just seeing cloud workloads as another
source of risk that you need to manage. The Risk Protection Program is a
collaboration between Google Cloud and two leading cyber insurance
companies, Munich Re and Allianz Global & Corporate Speciality.
The Risk Protection Program includes
Cyber Insurance Hub
,
which provides data-driven insights that you can use to better understand your
cloud security posture. If you're looking for cyber insurance coverage, you can
share these insights from Cyber Insurance Hub directly with our insurance
partners to obtain a quote. For more information, see
Google Cloud Risk Protection Program now in Preview
.
Help with deployment and governance
Shared fate also helps with your continued governance of your environment. For
example, we focus efforts on products such as the following:
Assured Workloads
,
which helps you meet your compliance obligations.
Security Command Center
Premium, which uses threat intelligence, threat detection, web scanning,
and other advanced methods to monitor and detect threats. It also provides
a way to resolve many of these threats quickly and automatically.
Organization policies
and
resource settings
that let you configure policies throughout your hierarchy of folders and
projects.
Policy Intelligence tools
that provide you with insights on access to accounts and resources.
Confidential Computing
,
which lets you encrypt data in use.
Sovereign Controls by Partners
, which is available in certain countries
and helps enforce data residency requirements.
Putting shared responsibility and shared fate into practice
As part of your planning process, consider the following actions to help you
understand and implement appropriate security controls:
Create a list of the type of workloads that you will host in
Google Cloud, and whether they require IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS services.
You can use the
shared responsibility diagram
as a checklist to ensure that you know the security controls that you need
to consider.
Create a list of regulatory requirements that you must comply with, and
access resources in the
Compliance resource center
that relate to those requirements.
Review the list of available blueprints and architectures in the
Architecture Center
for the security controls that you require for your particular workloads.
The blueprints provide a list of recommended controls and the IaC code that
you require to deploy that architecture.
Use the
landing zone documentation
and the recommendations in the
enterprise foundations guide
to design a resource hierarchy and network architecture that meets your
requirements. You can use the opinionated workload blueprints, like the
secured data warehouse, to accelerate your development process.
After you deploy your workloads, verify that you're meeting your
security responsibilities using services such as the
Cyber Insurance Hub, Assured Workloads,
Policy Intelligence tools, and Security Command Center Premium.
For more information, see the
CISO's Guide to Cloud Transformation paper
.
What's next
Review the
core security principles
.
Keep up to date with
shared fate resources
.
Familiarize yourself with available
blueprints
,
including the security foundations blueprint and workload examples like the
secured data warehouse.
Read more about
shared fate
.
Read about our underlying secure infrastructure in the
Google infrastructure security design overview
.
Read how to implement
NIST Cybersecurity Framework best practices in Google Cloud (PDF)
.
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2023-08-21 UTC.