Use AI securely and responsibly  |  Cloud Architecture Center  |  Google Cloud Documentation
Skip to main content
Send feedback
Use AI securely and responsibly
Stay organized with collections
Save and categorize content based on your preferences.
Last reviewed 2025-02-05 UTC
This principle in the security pillar of the
Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
provides recommendations to help you secure your AI systems. These
recommendations are aligned with Google's
Secure AI Framework (SAIF)
,
which provides a practical approach to address the security and risk concerns of
AI systems. SAIF is a conceptual framework that aims to provide industry-wide
standards for building and deploying AI responsibly.
Principle overview
To help ensure that your AI systems meet your security, privacy, and compliance
requirements, you must adopt a holistic strategy that starts with the initial
design and extends to deployment and operations. You can implement this holistic
strategy by applying the
six core elements of SAIF
.
Google uses AI to enhance security measures, such as identifying threats,
automating security tasks, and improving detection capabilities, while keeping
humans in the loop for critical decisions.
Google emphasizes a collaborative approach to advancing AI security. This
approach involves partnering with customers, industries, and governments to
enhance the SAIF guidelines and offer practical, actionable resources.
The recommendations to implement this principle are grouped within the
following sections:
Recommendations to use AI securely
Recommendations for AI governance
Recommendations to use AI securely
To use AI securely, you need both foundational security controls and
AI-specific security controls. This section provides an overview of
recommendations to ensure that your AI and ML deployments meet the security,
privacy, and compliance requirements of your organization.

For an overview of architectural principles and recommendations that are specific to AI
and ML workloads in Google Cloud, see the
AI and ML perspective
in the Well-Architected Framework.
Define clear goals and requirements for AI usage
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the SAIF element about contextualizing AI
system risks in the surrounding business processes. When you design and evolve
AI systems, it's important to understand your specific business goals, risks, and
compliance requirements.
Keep data secure and prevent loss or mishandling
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the following SAIF elements:
Expand strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem. This element
includes data collection, storage, access control, and protection against
data poisoning.
Contextualize AI system risks. Emphasize data security to support
business objectives and compliance.
Keep AI pipelines secure and robust against tampering
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the following SAIF elements:
Expand strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem. As a key
element of establishing a secure AI system, secure your code and model
artifacts.
Adapt controls for faster feedback loops. Because it's important for
mitigation and incident response, track your assets and pipeline runs.
Deploy apps on secure systems using secure tools and artifacts
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
Using secure systems and validated tools and artifacts in AI-based applications
aligns with the SAIF element about expanding strong security foundations to the
AI ecosystem and supply chain. This recommendation can be addressed through the
following steps:
Implement a secure environment for ML training and deployment
Use validated container images
Apply
Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA)
guidelines
Protect and monitor inputs
This recommendation is relevant to the following
focus areas
:
Logging, auditing, and monitoring
Security operations
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the SAIF element about extending detection and
response to bring AI into an organization's threat universe. To prevent issues,
it's critical to manage prompts for generative AI systems, monitor inputs, and
control user access.
Recommendations for AI governance
All of the recommendations in this section are relevant to the following
focus area
:
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.
Google Cloud offers a robust set of tools and services that you can use
to build responsible and ethical AI systems. We also offer a framework of
policies, procedures, and ethical considerations that can guide the development,
deployment, and use of AI systems.
As reflected in our recommendations, Google's approach for AI governance is
guided by the following principles:
Fairness
Transparency
Accountability
Privacy
Security
Use fairness indicators
Vertex AI
can detect bias during the data collection or post-training evaluation process.
Vertex AI provides
model evaluation metrics
like
data bias
and
model bias
to help you evaluate your model for bias.
These metrics are related to fairness across different categories like race,
gender, and class. However, interpreting statistical deviations isn't a
straightforward exercise, because differences across categories might not be a
result of bias or a signal of harm.
Use Vertex Explainable AI
To understand how the AI models make decisions, use Vertex Explainable AI. This
feature helps you to identify potential biases that might be hidden in the
model's logic.
This explainability feature is integrated with
BigQuery ML
and
Vertex AI
,
which provide feature-based explanations. You can either perform explainability
in BigQuery ML or
register your model
in Vertex AI and perform explainability in
Vertex AI.
Track data lineage
Track the origin and transformation of data that's used in your AI systems.
This tracking helps you understand the data's journey and identify potential
sources of bias or error.
Data lineage
is a Dataplex Universal Catalog feature that lets you track how data moves through your
systems: where it comes from, where it's passed to, and what transformations are
applied to it.
Establish accountability
Establish clear responsibility for the development, deployment, and outcomes of
your AI systems.
Use
Cloud Logging
to log key events and decisions made by your AI systems. The logs provide an
audit trail to help you understand how the system is performing and identify
areas for improvement.
Use
Error Reporting
to systematically analyze errors made by the AI systems. This analysis can
reveal patterns that point to underlying biases or areas where the model needs
further refinement.
Implement differential privacy
During model training,
add noise
to the data in order to make it difficult to identify individual data points but
still enable the model to learn effectively. With
SQL in BigQuery
,
you can transform the results of a query with differentially private
aggregations
.
Previous
arrow_back
Implement preemptive cyber defense
Next
Use AI for security
arrow_forward
Send feedback
Except as otherwise noted, the content of this page is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License
, and code samples are licensed under the
Apache 2.0 License
. For details, see the
Google Developers Site Policies
. Java is a registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates.
Last updated 2025-02-05 UTC.